       CAM strategies                                                                                                                                       © The helmet was programmed and produced by DAISHIN
   and functions for efficient
manufacturingcam strategies
Table of contents                Page

User interface                   3

2D strategies                    9

3D strategies                    17

HSC functions                    25

5axis machining                  29

Specialised applications         37

Mill/turn strategies             47

General functions                53

Feature and macro technologies   63

Post-processors and simulation   71

Strategy overview                75
User interface                                                                            User interface

hyperMILL® covers a very wide variety
of machining strategies, ranging from
Turning and Milling with 2D, 3D and
HSC applications, all the way through
to 5axis simultaneous and dedicated
special applications. All these strategies
are accessible from a single, coherent user
interface. Administrative tools, such as job
lists or component jobs, enable a highly
transparent and reliable workflow. Func-
tions such as associative programming or
parameter programming reduce program-
ming times. This programming philosophy
simplifies training and daily usage.

                                                                                         3
   Graphical user interface      Windows-oriented user interface

                                  E asy handling, single interface for all strategies, swift and
                                    secure programming

                                 Working with hyperMILL® is easy, as users are already familiar with the
                                 operating principle. The Windows look and feel facilitates user input.
                                 Clearly structured dialog boxes with a graphical and menu-guided user
                                 interface help users in their programming tasks.
                                 Individual jobs as well as complete job lists can be copied within and
                                 between projects using a drag-and-drop procedure. Tried and proven
                                 technology sequences can be transferred between similar projects at
                                 the click of a mouse.

                                 Rapid result technology

                                  Fast programming and modification with minimal errors

                                 Rapid result technology from hyperMILL® integrates automated func-
                                 tions that take modified parameters into account. A clearly arranged job
                                 management system, along with descriptions of problems and errors,
                                 reduce both programming and input errors. Machining status is displa-
                                 yed graphically, while easy setup, change and copying operations make
                                 it possible to implement modifications and variations very quickly.

   Dialog boxes with plain text
   instructions

4                                Erroneous entries are marked
                                Job list

                                 P arallel calculation and programming, structured procedures
                                   and job storage

                                With hyperMILL®, several projects can be open at the same time ­ while
                                one project is being calculated, another one can be programmed. A
                                single job list can be used for all machining strategies, from turning to
                                5axis simultaneous machining. The job lists are stored directly in the
                                CAD model. All relevant data is automatically integrated and linked
                                and can be retrieved at any time.

Job list with stock management  Tool list

                                               Compound job

                                                     F or well-structured job lists

                                                      Compound jobs help users to improve their project organisation and
                                                      management. A job list consists of several compound jobs. Users can
                                                      structure these jobs according to aspects such as machining process,
                                                      geometry, 3D position or tool orientation. Thus,itispossibletocre-
                                                      ate structured lists containing many hundreds of programming steps.
                                                      F urthermore, the various jobs can be shown or hidden as a group.

                                                                                                                            User interface

Clear structuring according                                                                                                 5

to job group
           Input screen                Associative programming
           Application of variables
                                         T ime-saving programming with associative copies
6
                                        This functionality allows users to work more flexibly and quickly edit
                                        common machining strategies where only few parameters differ across
                                        several steps in a job.
                                        Associative jobs permanently link all parameters with an original refe-
                                        rence job. Changes to the reference job are automatically copied to the
                                        associated jobs. Any individually definable parameter for a job step can
                                        be unlinked from the template by a simple mouse click so that it can be
                                        defined differently for this job step.
                                        All parameters that have been unlinked from the job template are dis-
                                        played in a separate window of the job step where they can be edited.

                                       Parameter programming

                                         Flexible changes and fast variant programming

                                        Programming with parameters enables the description of dependencies
                                        and consequently a rational modification with user-defined variables.
                                        This makes it possible to quickly implement variations and changes.

                                       Defining zero points

                                         C ustomising aspects such as positional tolerances
                                            or multiple clampings

                                        By defining zero points, positional tolerances and positions can be flex-
                                        ibly and transparently customised to current requirements. Each defined
                                        zero point is assigned a unique ID, and during post-processing this
                                        unique ID is translated into a corresponding NC code by means of a zero
                                        point table. This feature also allows the definition of multiple zero points.

                                     The new zero point appears as an entry in the frame browser.
Editing screen  Global editing

                 Fast and easy editing across within multiple jobs
                hyperMILL®'s user interface offers additional options to edit parameters
                through several jobs simultaneously. Next to central parameters such as
                surface, depth, allowance or infeed, various other geometry selections
                such as milling or milling surfaces and even macros can be changed
                within multiple jobs.

                Extended setup

                 Improved management of data and files used in hyperMILL®
                This function simplifies the handling, entry and configuration of di-
                rectories containing essential hyperMILL® data such as postprocessor
                information, machine definitions and NC files. When saving a CAD model,
                a backup copy can be created automatically. The storage location and
                number of backup copies are freely definable.

                                                                                          User interface

                Setup definition                                                          7
2D strategies

hyperMILL® enables the efficient program-
ming and processing of typical 2D tasks.
High-performance 2D contour milling, intel-
ligent feature technology and the support
of controller-specific NC formats are just a
few of the reasons why.
9  2D strategies
                                                        Face milling

                                                         Large surfaces

                                                        With the face milling strategy, flat areas can be machined quickly and
                                                        simply in one-way or zigzag paths. This allows several independent
                                                        surfaces to be machined in a single operation.

    Zigzag mode with filleted path links

                                                        Pocket milling

                                                         O pen and closed pockets with or without islands
                                                           and circular or square pockets

                                                        In this way, any pocket can be machined, even if it includes islands and
                                                        additional pockets with various heights and depths. This strategy always
                                                        seeks a start point where the plunging occurs outside of the material.
                                                        If this is not possible, a stepdown is made directly in the material via a
                                                        ramp or a helix, depending on the type of milling tool and setting. This
                                                        strategy also supports canned cycles for round and square pockets.

    Minimised number of rapid movements and dwell time

                                                        Automatic feature  Complete machining  Supports 2D controller

10                                                      recognition        of the bottom       cycles
                                   Contour milling

                                    Optimised machining of open and closed contours

                                   The contour milling strategy is used to machine complex contours. A
                                   selection can be made between centre path and contour path, including
                                   G41/G42 tool path compensation. hyperMILL® automatically prepares
                                   the contours, detects bottlenecks and self-cuts and prevents collisions
                                   with defined safe zones.

                                   The "Automatic orientation", "Fast travel optimisation" and "Contour
                                   sorting" functions assist users while programming models with multiple
                                   contour areas or for machining automatically detected pocket features.

                                   The automatic search feature for starting points can be used together
                                   with intelligent approach and retract macros to ensure that infeeds and
                                   transition movements are always performed in the most suitable areas
                                   for the technology in use. Other functions such as automatic vertical step
                                   down, multiple infeeds and definition of additional finishing offsets al-
                                   low users to make effective and reliable use of their tools.

Machining with multiple Z-infeeds
2D trimming against the model...

                                   ...with automatic cut division Fillet outside edges...  ... with extended edges       2D strategies

                                   Optimisation functions

                                   Checking self-cut, bottleneck Spiral machining down     With multiple lateral infeed

                                   and collision  to the bottom                                                          11
                                                    Playback

                                                     S imple creation of toolpaths

                                                    Toolpaths can be generated manually by moving the tool across the mo-
                                                    del with the mouse. Once defined, hyperMILL® performs a collision check
                                                    for the tool against the model. If a collision is detected, the software mo-
                                                    difies the tool paths to place them at collision free points on the model.

    Easy generation of NC toolpaths

                                                    With collision checks  Reliable programming of machining
                                                                           processes

                                                    Rest machining

                                                     The machining of residual stock

                                                    For areas not accessible using large tools in 2D contour and pocket
                                                    machining, this strategy calculates separate tool paths for small milling
                                                    tools. This referencing approach automatically detects all areas that have
                                                    not been processed and machines them. It detects not only areas within
                                                    a contour, but also between different contours.

    Residual stock machined with contour or pocket                         Tangential infeed for best surfaces

12  machining cycle
                                              Drilling

                                               C entering, simple drilling, deep drilling, drilling with
                                                 chip break, reaming and boring, thread milling and drilling,
                                                 deep hole drilling

                                              The strategies and functions for drilling enable highly efficient program-
                                              ming, especially in conjunction with feature and macro technologies.
                                              Depending on the machine controller and available options, the postpro-
                                              cessor will supports canned cycles, subroutines, point lists or will output
                                              simple G1 movements.

                                              In helical drilling, the milling tool cuts into the part in a spiral motion.
                                              The user can freely define the pitch of the spiral, within the limits
                                              of technological reason. Internal and external threads are produced
                                              by thread milling. The option of deep hole drilling enables the milling
                                              of very deep holes.

Drill optimisation: shortest path

Drill optimisation: X-parallel

Helical drilling with freely definable pitch                                                                                2D strategies

                                              Programming with feature recognition                                          13
                                         Optimised simple drilling

                                          D rilling deep holes

                                         Complex deep holes with various steps and cross-holes can be pro-
                                         grammed separately using hyperMILL®. The infeeds, drilling speeds and
                                         coolant can be controlled separately for different areas and geometry
                                         elements such as guide bushings, pilot holes or cross-holes. Here, the
                                         strategy detects cross-holes in the specified stock.

    Automatic detection of cross-holes

                                                                  Pilot hole  F1, S1, M9

                                         Cross-hole/breakthrough              F2, S2, M8

                                                                                         F3, S3, M9
                                                                              F4, S4, M9

                                                                                         F5, S5, M9
                                                                              F2, S2, M8

    Input screen for optimising process

14
Feature-supported 5axis drilling         5axis drilling

                                          D rilling with different tool angles in a single operation with
                                            optimised toolpath lengths

                                         The 5axis drilling function is used to simply and automatically program
                                         drilling operations with different tool inclinations in a single operation.
                                         An automated function calculates the tool inclination and connects all
                                         reference points of drilling operations for the best possible path.

                                         Within certain drill patterns, the clearance plane can be defined very clo-
                                         se to the part, and the tool need not repeatedly go to a safety position.
                                         For the machining of different drill patterns with different tool inclina-
                                         tions, additional retraction positions can be defined that reduce the
                                         path length. The movements between the drill holes and the movements
                                         between the individual machining planes are automatically checked for
                                         collision against the model. If collisions are detected,
                                         the cycle automatically positions the tool on a collision-free plane.

                                         Drill hole optimisation reduces the paths travelled between the drill
                                         holes in one plane. If a rotating axis movement is required, the user can
                                         determine whether the A-axis or C-axis is used first. Furthermore, users
                                         also have the option of using the Z-height as a sorting criterion.

Optimised tool path between holes using
different tool inclinations

Optimised drilling for B-axis                                                                                         2D strategies

                                         Optimised drilling for C-axis Optimised drilling for Z-level

                                                                                                              15
16
3D strategies                                                                          3D strategies

hyperMILL® offers a broad spectrum of
3D strategies. Intelligent add-ons generate
optimised machining programs for better
surfaces and shorter machining times.

                                                                                     17
    Contour-parallel machining  Roughing
    Axis-parallel machining
                                 Optimised and reliable roughing, based on current stock
                                   calculation

                                All depths may be machined by contour offsets from model or parallel to
                                a specific axis. The stock may be generated from surface or solid models,
                                from extruded or revolved profiles or as a result of any previous machi-
                                ning process. Due to automatic stock recognition, the remaining stock
                                areas are easily detected and machined from any direction.
                                By defining minimal material removal, milling paths are optimised, and
                                very short and redundant movements are avoided. The 'Force contour
                                cutting' parameter enables the use of this strategy for preliminary finish-
                                ing and rest machining. As a result, a uniform offset is already achieved
                                during roughing. The plunge movements are optimised by entering the
                                tool parameters for core diameter and core height. Here, the infeed is
                                calculated automatically and adapted to the tool.
                                Collisions are checked against the stock model and part model. When a
                                possible collision is recognised, the user can select to stop the process
                                or to adjust the toolpath laterally and continue the operation at a greater
                                depth.

                                Optimisation functions

    Automatic plane detection Machining entire part with Avoiding full cuts  Filleting corners
                                           a constant allowance

    Use for preliminary finishing Cast offset roughing  Rest machining from various Lateral offset to prevent colli-

18                                                      directions           sion with shank and holder
Finishing: Profile finishing

 Milling close to contours

Profile finishing enables collision-free machining along surfaces and
surface groups. Such machining offers a number of strategies and
o ptimisation functions in order to individually machine complex areas
and to adapt NC paths to the special properties of a model.

Axis-parallel machining

Contour-parallel machining

Tool path 90° to guide curve Tool path lateral as offset  Cross-flow tool path motion Tool path motion flowing bet-  3D strategies
                                       to guide curve     between two guide curves ween two guide curves

Optimisation functions

XY optimisation                                           Machining of only flat areas Profile roughing

                                                                                                                     19
                                  Finishing: Z-level finishing

                                   For steep areas

                                  Machining is executed close to the contour on planes with a constant
                                  Z-infeed. For optimal machining, this strategy offers several machining
                                  functions and optimisation parameters. For closed milling areas, the
                                  "spiral" strategy achieves the best surfaces and machining process.

Plane- or pocket-based machining  Spiral machining of closed milling areas Zigzag machining of open milling areas

                                  Optimisation functions

                                  Machining steep areas  Automatic Z-infeed  Undercut machining with
                                                         adjustment          lollipop or woodruff cutter

20 Plane level detection
Rest machining of incompletely m achined areas         Automatic rest machining

                                                        Rest machining

                                                       In the finishing cycle, automatic rest machining detects incomplete ma-
                                                       chined areas. After defining the reference tool and the machining
                                                       area using the boundary function, the necessary rest machining is
                                                       a utomatically executed.

                                                       A rest material area that has not been machined due to potential colli-
                                                       sions can be used as a reference for a subsequent machining step with
                                                       modified tools (e.g., longer tool lengths). This ensures that only the areas
                                                       that could not be completed during the first step are machined in this
                                                       next one.

                                                       The machining strategies for cavities make it possible to create grooves,
                                                       ribs, and deep or narrow slits in a single machining step. Deep areas
                                                       containing large amounts of material can be cleared completely and
                                                       effectively using a constant infeed.

Milling grooves

                 Bullnose endmill as refe-      Previous job as reference  With definition of machining Undercut machining with      3D strategies
                 rence tool
                                                                           depth  lollipop mills

                                                       Optimisation functions

                 Visualisation of non-ma- Machining of only steep          Machining of only flat areas Pencil milling

                 chined area                    areas                                                                                21
                                              Complementary strategy: Complete finishing

                                               Electrodes and prismatic parts

                                              By combining Z-level finishing and profile finishing, this strategy can
                                              automatically adapt machining to the requirements of individual regions
                                              of a model. In accordance with the defined slope angle, machining
                                              is divided automatically between steep and flat areas, both of which
                                              can be processed in a spiral pattern.

Slope machining

                                              Parallel machining paths  Automatic alignment based Pocket-shaped clearing when
                                              for flat areas            on longest pocket dimension there are large distances

                                                                                                               between paths

                                              Complementary strategy: Equidistant finishing

                                               Models with flat and steep areas

                                              By defining one or two guide curves, the strategy calculates the milling
                                              paths parallel to the indicated curve. Here, the distance between paths
                                              is not calculated in the XY plane, but rather always on the surface. In this
                                              way, flat and steep areas can be machined in a single operation with the
                                              same surface quality.

           Machining with closed guide curve                            Machining between two  Spiral machining between
                                                                        open guide curves      two guide curves
22
ISO machining with global alignment          Complementary strategy: ISO machining

                                              P recise machining of individual surfaces and transition radii
                                                with uniform path distances

                                             ISO machining can be performed with global alignment or by defining the
                                             direction of machining with ISO curves. When machining with ISO align-
                                             ment, the milling paths run along the ISO curves (U and V). The U and V
                                             curves of contiguous surfaces are automatically aligned. This facilitates
                                             machining across several surfaces without retracting the tool. The ma-
                                             chining area can be limited by a boundary. The global alignment strategy
                                             automatically determines the optimal milling direction based on the
                                             longest boundary of the selected surface. The user defines whether the
                                             machining proceeds diagonally or freely to the direction of machining.
                                             Multiple surfaces can also be selected here. In addition, spiral machining
                                             in one step without a dwell point is possible.

                                             Complementary strategy: Freepath machining

                                              Simple engraving and edge milling

                                             During curve machining, the cutter follows a defined contour.
                                             This strategy can be used for especially quick engraving on a planar or
                                             curved surface, or for deburring, chamfering or trimming 3D edges.

Controlling the tool path with guide curves                                                                              3D strategies

                                             Complementary strategy: 3D rework machining

                                              Editing of tool paths to prevent collision

                                             With the aid of rework machining, tool paths from a reference operation
                                             with other tools and modified tool inclinations can be output without
                                             recalculating the path, and checked for collisions. This can be done
                                             on the complete tool path as well as with path sections that have been
                                             excluded in the reference operation in order to prevent collisions.

                                             Outputting of complete tool paths                                           23

                                             with optimised positioning
24
High-speed cutting                                                                    HSC functions

To respond appropriately to the strict
requirements for precision, surface quality,
tool life and machine dynamics, hyperMILL®
integrates special functions for high-speed
cutting. These functions expand many of
the 3D milling strategies.

                                                                                    25
                                    Filleting of corner radii

                                     For high feed rates with continuous machine movements

                                    For smoother machine movements and better cutting behaviour, interior
                                    corners can be filleted. Tool path filleting is available as an additional
                                    function with, among others, roughing, Z-level finishing, profile finishing
                                    and automatic rest machining.

           Roughing                 Z-level finishing  Profile finishing  Rest machining

           Plunging via helix path  Smooth plunging

26                                   O ptimal cutting conditions for constant cutter loads

                                    With axial infeed, an optimal feed rate can be maintained and the tool
                                    can be protected using a helix or a linear ramp.
                                       Smooth infeed

                                        O ptimised tool movement between tool paths

                                       Approaches and retracts, as well as the transition between individual pa-
                                       ths, can be filleted. During the process, the tool can also be raised from
                                       the surface in a smooth movement.

Smooth approach and retract movements

                                       Spiral machining

                                        For high feed rates and optimal cutting conditions

                                       Machining is optimised for Z-level and equidistant finishing, for
                                       a utomatic rest machining and for machining closed curves with a conti-
                                       nuous tool path ­ including complete or near-complete spiral infeed.

Continuous spiral tool path                                                                                        HSC functions

                                       Avoiding full cuts

                                        E ven tool load and averting tool breakage while
                                          milling grooves

                                       Trochoidal machining is the best strategy when milling grooves in the
                                       HSC area. Spiral step-over movements allow larger chip loads and reduce
                                       the time when machining larger depths of cut.

                                       Trochoidal machining                                                        27
28
5axis machining                                                                                                                                          5axis machining

For demanding geometries such as deep
cavities, high steep walls and undercuts,
3D machining is not possible because of
collisions ­ or it is only possible with long
tools. Machining these areas requires
precisely defined milling areas and many
different tool inclinations, which can be
accomplished without collisions using
5axis machining. Depending on the geo-
metry and machine kinematics, you can
select between 5axis machining with a
fixed tool inclination, automatic indexing
or simultaneous machining. Larger, slightly
curved surfaces and geometries that follow
leading surfaces or profiles can also be
efficiently milled using 5axis machining.

                                                                                                                                                       29
                                             Multi-axis indexing with fixed tool inclination

                                              A ll 2D machining jobs from different sides

                                             This function enables the machining of parts from different directions
                                             with one setup. It shifts and tilts the workplane for machining. The direc-
                                             tion of machining corresponds to the orientation of the tool. Programs
                                             can be transformed and copied, even on multiple workplanes, without
                                             additional job calculation.

    Shifted and tilted workplane

                                             With program part repetition  Program part repetition with multiple
                                                                           setup

                                             Milling with fixed option 3+2

                                              All 3D machining operations with the tool pivoted relative
                                                 to the direction of machining

                                             Cutting areas can be programmed from a single machining direction
                                             with different tool inclinations and free of collision. They can be easily
                                             kept separate, with no overlapping or gaps occurring. The course of the
                                             paths for neighbouring areas and the appearance of the surface can
                                             be precisely determined. In addition, this strategy ensures that all
                                             areas including details are completely calculated.

30  Programming with fixed tool inclination
Automatic search for fixed tool inclination        Automatic indexing

                                                    A utomated 3+2 milling as an alternative to 5axis
                                                      simultaneous machining

                                                   Areas that require multiple tool angles for machining are programmed
                                                   and milled in a single operation using automatic indexing. This method
                                                   automatically seeks a collision-free fixed tool angle for individual milling
                                                   areas and/or toolpaths. You can choose whether perpendicular (vertical)
                                                   or angled tool orientations are preferred. With manually defined segment
                                                   limits, milling areas can also be individually separated. If necessary,
                                                   5axis simultaneous machining operations can also be used for local ma-
                                                   chining. In comparison to complete 5axis simultaneous machining, how-
                                                   ever, automatic indexing minimises machine movement. This reduces
                                                   machining times and thus minimises stress on the machines.

                                                   If it is not possible to calculate a collision-free fixed tool angle for
                                                   an area, then, with 5axis rest machining, for example, a subdivision
                                                   into smaller segments with different tool angles can be performed
                                                   a utomatically.

Profile finishing with optimised tool inclination                                                                                5axis machining

                                                   5axis simultaneous machining

                                                    M achining on or near steep walls; alternative to fixed tool
                                                      inclination or automatic indexing

                                                   This 5axis machining cycle is the alternative to conventional 3+2 milling.
                                                   Here a tool tilt to the Z-axis is defined, which hyperMILL® automatically
                                                   changes to prevent collisions. The continuous movement of the tool
                                                   around the Z-axis is calculated by hyperMILL® either fully automatically
                                                   or as a result of defined guide curve.

                                                   Fully automatic calculation
                                                   of tool inclination

Radial tool alignment                              Tool axis always runs    Tool axis runs locally   Manual curve for movement
to Z-axis
                                                   through the guide curve  through the guide curve  only around the Z-axis      31
                                                             5axis Strategies for Cavity Machining

                                                             F or difficult geometries such as deep cavities and
                                                                steep high walls

                                                             hyperMILL® 5AXIS adds 5-axis positions to "z level Finishing", profile
                                                             finishing, equidistant finishing, free path milling, rest machining and
                                                             rework machining 3D strategies. These strategies can now be used for
                                                             3+2 milling, automatic indexing and 5axis milling. Thanks to the fully
                                                             automatic calculation of tool positions, 5axis machining jobs can be
                                                             programmed as easily as conventional 3D tasks.

                                                             5axis "z level Finishing" is used to machine steep surfaces as planes
                                                             or pockets. Flat areas can be automatically excluded in this type
                                                             of finishing.

    5axis z level Finishing with simultaneous machining

                                                             As with conventional 3D tasks, flat or slightly curved areas can be
                                                             machined using 5axis profile finishing. 5axis collision avoidance
                                                             allows you to mill near steep walls using a short tool in a single
                                                             step. Combined with automatic indexing, steep walls can also be
                                                             machined in the removal direction of the mould.

    5axis profile finishing with automatic indexing

                                                                                         Simultaneous machining Fixed position

                                                             5axis equidistant finishing allows you to machine steep and flat areas in
                                                             a single operation. This strategy generates especially smooth transitions
                                                             between individual tool paths. It helps prolong the lifespan of tools and
                                                             machines and ensures the best surfaces possible.

32  5axis equidistant finishing with simultaneous machining
                                                    5axis curve machining makes it possible to mill engravings without colli-
                                                    sions using short tools, even near steep walls.

5axis free path milling with automatic indexing                                                                                                  5axis machining

                                                                            5axis rest machining offers all the options of 3D rest machining in
                                                                            addition to the 5axis tool positions. Automatic indexing determines
                                                                            the positions and areas that allow the part to be completely
                                                                            machined in a single operation.

5axis rest machining with automatic indexing

                                                    5axis rework machining (editor) is used to convert 3D programs into
                                                    5axis programs. It also allows 3D tools that have been excluded due
                                                    to a collision to be machined as 5axis simultaneous machining jobs
                                                    or with automatically calculated fixed positions. All 3Dand5axistool-
                                                    paths can also be optimised to improve milling results.

5axis rework machining with simultaneous machining                                                                                               33
                                              5axis cutting edge machining

                                               Machining of 3D trimming tools

                                              The strategy enables a fast reproducible machining of cutting edges.
                                              The machining job is defined using a reference curve. After selecting the
                                              edge and inputting the height and clearance angle, the machining job
                                              is calculated automatically.

    Exact, reproducible machining operations  5axis contour machining
    Milling grooves
                                               M illing grooves, engraving, deburring and chamfering

                                              With this strategy the tool is guided on or relative to a curve with a fixed
                                              orientation to the surface. Grooves, chamfers and other similar geome-
                                              tries don't have to be designed in detail. The automatic collision detec-
                                              tion and avoidance functions makes programming these machining jobs
                                              easy and reliable. If necessary, the tool orientation can also be manually
                                              changed for particular areas.

                                              Trimming ­ perpendicular Chamfering ­ fixed tilt  Engraving ­ perpendicular
                                                                                                to surface
                                              to surface  angle to surface

34
                                            5axis top milling

                                             Machining of large, moderately curved surfaces

                                            Top milling reduces cutting time by allowing larger path step-overs.
                                            High-quality surfaces are achieved by automatically adapting the tool in-
                                            clination for concave surfaces. Machining is not limited to single surfaces
                                            only. Furthermore, this strategy can also be used for very effective 5axis
                                            roughing, thanks to multiple infeeds and stock detection.

Roughing a shaped pocket base               With constant optical path With optimal fit to the
Machining ruled surface with flank contact
                                            width                          surface

                                            5axis swarf cutting                                                           5axis machining

                                             M achining of ruled surfaces

                                            The side of the tool is used to machine workpiece surfaces with the swarf
                                            milling process. Large stopovers between paths reduce the cutting time
                                            and improve the workpiece surface finish. The tool is guided by a surface
                                            along a reference curve. As an alternative, it is also possible to guide the
                                            tool between two curves. Multiple axial and lateral infeeds make swarf
                                            cutting also suitable for roughing. Machining can be precisely and simply
                                            executed by defining stop and milling surfaces and stock tracking.

                                            Machining double-curved Swarf cutting with stop
                                            surfaces with point contact surface

                                                                                                                35
      Specialised
      applications

             Geometries such as impellers, blisks, turbi-
             ne blades, tubes and tyres pose special re-
             quirements that standard strategies cannot
             satisfy. For this reason, hyperMILL® offers
             user-friendly special applications seam-
             lessly integrated into the CAM system.

36
37  Specialised applications
           Continuous spiral path   Blade package: 5axis top milling

38                                   F inishing blade surfaces

                                    5axis blade top milling enables continuously spiralling finish machining
                                    with freely definable offsets to the blade and side surfaces. The spiral
                                    tool path can be generated as a 5axis or 4axis simultaneous machining
                                    job. For endmills and bullnose endmills, the lead angle is automatically
                                    adjusted such that the surfaces are not damaged and the tool always
                                    cuts with the front edge.

                                                                  Automatic lead angle correction

                                    Blade package: Platform machining

                                     P latform machining, trimming and deburring of surfaces

                                    A number of 2D and 3D strategies are available for machining the plat-
                                    forms of a blade. The 2D category includes strategies for drilling, facing,
                                    curve and pocket milling. The various 3D operations include roughing
                                    cycles, finishing operations for the mechanical attachment geometry, as
                                    well as strategies for trimming, deburring or milling/machining curved
                                    surfaces.

                                   Complementary strategies for platform machining
Blade swarf cutting                            Blade package: 5axis swarf cutting                                           Specialised applications
Point machining
                                                R est machining, fillet milling, machining blade walls

                                               The tool moves in parallel or spiral paths around the blade to point-mill a
                                               seamless transition from top-milling of the blade surfaces to the platform
                                               surface including the fillets and to swarf-mill the platform surfaces.
                                               A rolling ball fillet condition can be created even in conditions when the
                                               designed fillet would ordinarily can not be fully generated due to the
                                               platform dimensions. The tool maintains contact with the blade and a
                                               straight boundary of the platform to achieve a perfect transition in refe-
                                               rence to the platforms of neighbouring blades, which cannot be achieved
                                               in many CAD systems.

                                               Blade package: Point machining

                                                M achining blade and root surfaces

                                               5axis blade point milling optimises finishing at the transition between
                                               the blade and the root surface of the top or bottom. Overlapping toolpath
                                               for blade machining provide excellent surface qualities. Alternatively, a
                                               rolling ball radius can be generated here.

Surface transition with rolling ball function  Transition without rolling ball function                                     39
                                                          Multi-blade package: Roughing

                                                           P re-turned stock or semi-finished workpiece

                                                          The most common roughing strategies are taking slices through the so-
                                                          lid. Machining takes place pocket by pocket between the blades. Various
                                                          roughing strategies such as "hub offset" or "shroud offset" enable con-
                                                          trol of path distribution, tool inclination and tool length to be optimally
                                                          adapted to the geometry. Plunge roughing can also be used.

Continuous pocket-by-pocket machining

                                                  Layered machining parallel Layered machining perpendi- Plunge roughing with long

                                                  to hub  cular to hub           narrow tools

                                                          Multi-blade package: Hub finishing

                                                           H ub finishing, rest machining close to the blade

                                                          This strategy is suitable for the complete or partial finishing of hub
                                                          surfaces. With various infeed options and a scallop height function for
                                                          the area around the leading and trailing edges, the machining job can be
                                                          prec isely adapted to the requirements and the machining time mini-
                                                          mised. This strategy can also be applied as rest machining near blade
                                                          surfaces.

           Complete or partial machining of hubs          Shorter paths using special Shorter paths for the

40                                                        scallop height option  "pocket" infeed
Point milling                         Multi-blade package: Blade machining                                           Specialised applications
Swarf cutting
                                       M illing blade surfaces

                                      Depending on the blade geometry, blades are machined with point
                                      contact finishing or swarf cutting. Point milling is a very robust techno-
                                      logy that is able to machine any blade geometry. It is used especially in
                                      high-speed applications, in the manufacturing of prototypes or when the
                                      blade geometry cannot be swarf cut with the necessary precision.

                                      The flank contact with swarf cutting reduces the number of necessary
                                      machining paths and thereby the machining time required. The best fit
                                      of the tool to the surface is found simply by clicking the mouse. This option
                                      simultaneously indicates the surface quality that has been achieved.

                                      Complementary machining strategies

                                       M illing the fillet radii between the blade and hub s urfaces
                                         as well as between the leading and trailing edges

                                      If the leading and/or trailing edges cannot be machined in a continuous
                                      operation around the blade due to the geometry or for technical reasons,
                                      multi-blade edge machining is applied. Milling transitional areas bet-
                                      ween the blade and the hub surfaces is used if the model contains very
                                      small or variable fillet radii.

Machining leading and trailing edges  Milling transitional radii                                                     41
    Simple definition of the central curve  Tube package: Machining definition
    Effective undercut machining
                                             W ith surface or digitised data

                                            All that is needed to define the particular machining type is a simple
                                            curve. There are no special requirements with respect to the surface defi-
                                            nition, the number of surfaces, the quality of surface patches, the course
                                            of ISO curves or the surface orientation. It is possible to work directly
                                            with the digitised data.

                                            Tube package: 5axis roughing

                                             5 axis roughing with undercut tubes from the full job

                                            This strategy is an effective alternative to machining with several jobs
                                            required for 3+2 machining. It enables the continuous roughing of a
                                            tube from the full job. There is spiral infeed to the bottom, and work is
                                            executed on the p lane. Optimisation functions including preventing
                                            unnecessary movements of the rotary axes in strongly undercut tubes,
                                            allow processing of simple and complex tube geometries.

42                                          Removal from outside to inside  Removal from inside to outside
                                         Tube package: 5axis finishing

                                          F ine machining of undercut tubes

                                         5axis Tube Finishing works with a spiral or parallel tool path. Spiral
                                         machining creates seamless surfaces. With parallel machining, it is also
                                         possible to avoid unnecessary movements of the rotary axes. Machining
                                         of inlet and exhaust regions can be easily matched to avoid overlapping
                                         paths. Collision avoidance allows tools with the shortest shank length,
                                         lollipops and tools with thick shanks to be used. Using the most stable
                                         tools guarantees high-quality surfaces.

Seamless surfaces with spiral tool path                                                                            Specialised applications
Machining partially open tubes

                                         Tube package: 5axis rest machining

                                          M achining of rest material areas

                                         With this strategy, rest material areas are machined in either a spiral
                                         or parallel movement. The areas to be machined are described by
                                         a reference curve. The machining region can be limited by defining
                                         a value relative to the reference curve.

Rest machining in tubes                                                                                            43
                                                                         Tyre package: Tyre clock

                                                                          D escription of the arrangement of identical tyre sections

                                                                         Tyre moulds consist of a complex pattern of repeating pitches that are
                                                                         machined into various mould segments. By recognizing the various
                                                                         patterns, hyperMILL® limits the programming to individual pitches.
                                                                         The tyre clock definition is used to define the pitch locations around
                                                                         the tyre mould, and specifically on each mould segment. The complete
                                                                         tyres are built up by means of the tyre clock in the most automated man-
                                                                         ner possible.

Arrangement of identical tyre sections.

                                                                         Tyre package: Automatic segment generation

                                                                          A utomated programming

                                                                         When creating NC paths, the tool paths are copied to the corresponding
                                                                         position in the tyre. In doing so, the automated segment generation
                                                                         function adjusts the tool paths that go beyond the segment boundary.

           Copying tool paths to the corresponding position on the tyre
           form

44
                              Tyre package: Machining strategies

                               O ptimised milling strategies

                              With the tyre package, the dialogue boxes of all 2D, 3D and 5axis
                              strategies are expanded by a parameter that allows the user to assign
                              each machining strategy a pitch (section of identical construction).
                              Most of the tyre machining process is based on foundation hyperMILL®
                              strategies.

                                                                                                     Specialised applications

5axis roughing (top milling)
3D roughing
5axis rest machining

                              5axis swarf cutting  5axis contour machining                           45
Mill/turn strategies

The millTURN module of hyperMILL®
enables the creation of NC programs for
turning and milling in a single set-up.
Because of the module's complete inte
gration, the tool database, stock tracking
and collision check functions as well as
post-processors can be used together for
all milling and turning operations.
47  Mill/turn strategies
Defining                               Turning contour and turning stock definition
the b ounding
geometry                                S imple and convenient creation of turning contour and turning
                                          stock

                                       With hyperMILL®, the user can automatically generate the turning contour
                                       and turning stock for machining. The turning contour can be created by
                                       selecting a 2D contour and a corresponding axis, or can be automati-
                                       cally generated via surface/solid/STL selection (maximum interference
                                       contour) by entering the frame and tolerance. The software automatically
                                       takes into account elements that are to be milled in subsequent steps.
                                       This results in a turning contour that ensures precise machining for rota-
                                       tionally symmetrical elements.

                                       In addition to the turning contour, the turning stock can also be automat-
                                       ically created. With stock tracking and the option of switching between
                                       milling and turning stock, you can always work with the current stock.
                                       This ensures precise machining and helps to avoid unnecessary redun-
                                       dant movements. The following options are available for the definition of
                                       turning stock:

                                       n G enerate on the basis of 3D milling stock
                                       n Define by surface/solid/STL selection (maximum interference contour),

                                          specification of axes and tolerance
                                       n Define as cylinder with or without stock allowance
                                       n D efine as pipe with or without stock allowance

                                       To define the bounding geometry, the surfaces are selected by clicking on
                                       them with the mouse. hyperMILL® automatically creates the correspond-
                                       ing geometry. In addition, a parallel stock allowance can be defined as an
                                       offset to the contour, for example for cast parts.

                                       Drilling

                                        D rilling with a fixed tool

                                       This strategy is suitable for creating holes in the centre ­ on the turning
                                       axis of the part ­ including stock tracking with a fixed tool. On mill/turn
                                       machines, this strategy offers an alternative to helical drilling.

48 Fixed drill and rotating workpiece
  Turn roughing                                                                                       Mill/turn strategies

    M achining of rotationally symmetrical interior and exterior
       stock surfaces of any shape

   Machining with turn roughing occurs in an axial, radial or contour-parallel
   direction, including determination of the cutting edge angle for down-
   ward cuts. Functions such as the definition of workpiece positions,
   contour selection, stock trimming, stock tracking or path compensation
   enable an optimisation of the machining job. Tool definitions may also
   be made using standardized ISO definitions.

Axis parallel roughing

Face turning

Contour-parallel roughing

Positioned turning with optimised tool inclination  Clearance angle to  Stock resulting from turning
                                                    protect the insert
                                                                        and milling processes         49
Turn finishing            Turn finishing

                           C ontour-parallel finish machining of rotationally
                             symmetrical surfaces

                          With this strategy, the roughed surfaces of workpieces of any shape
                          are finished in a contour-parallel manner, recognising the cutting edge
                          angle for downward cuts as well. Functions for defining tool inclination,
                          approach and retract macros, path compensation and stock offer various
                          options to meet the needs of any machining job. The various approach
                          and retract macros can be combined with each other.

                          Slope-dependent finishing specifically enables the machining of flat and
                          steep regions and ensures optimal cutting conditions during finishing. To
                          define the areas to be machined, the user first selects the entire contour.
                          Next, the user defines the areas that are to be machined and the maxi-
                          mum slope angle to be used in the single-step process.

           Steep regions  Flat regions  Slope-dependent turning deactivated

50                        Approach and retract macros Tangential approach            Approach and retract
                                                                 and retract macros  in an arc
                                                        Grooving

                                                         W orkpieces with grooves or shoulders

                                                        The operations of grooving, parting off and groove turning are program-
                                                        mable with this strategy. Workpieces with grooves and shoulders can be
                                                        machined either radially or axially. To optimise the machining process,
                                                        the ISCAR groove strategy is implemented. This automatically accounts
                                                        for the lateral displacement of the cutting length as a result of the lateral
                                                        cutting forces. Further optimisation functions are available, such as finish
                                                        pass, wall distance, ramp angle, tool path compensation or chip break.
                                                        This strategy also enables slope-dependent machining.

Axial grooving                                                                                                                          Mill/turn strategies

                            Axial grooving with ramp    Radial roughing for narrow Rework machining in one  Rework machining only from
                            for materials difficult to                                                      top to bottom
                            machine                     and deep grooves  step

                                                        Thread cutting

                                                         C reation of external and internal threads with constant pitch

                                                        Thread cutting enables the turning of single or multiple, cylindrical and
                                                        conical shaped, external and internal threads. Infeed occurs with either
                                                        constant chip section or constant X-value. Threads are very easy to define
                                                        by determining the outer edge of the thread, core or outer diameter, as
                                                        well as leading or trailing movement. Control of the infeed, the infeed
                                                        angle or the finishing allowance make it possible to respond to individual
                                                        requirements.

Turning an external thread                                                                                                              51
General functions

Functions that apply to all strategies,
such as stock tracking, milling and stop
surface concepts or automatic collision
avoidance, provide for effective, user-
friendly techniques.
General functions

Bohrfeaturererkennung
Innerhalb eines festge-
legten Bereichs können
Bauteile nach Boh-
rungen entweder mit
gleicher Orientierung.
Usto del del ullamet er
ad duissis sequam, qui
tat lor at. To odoleniam
irit ut alit augait vele-
sting eugait wisl exer
aciliquat. Ut iureet ac

                                                                                           53
Model analysis                                      Analysis functions

Integration of standar                               V erification of parts and tools for efficient job planning and
dised colour tables                                    CAM programming

                                                    The functions for modelling, surface and tool analysis allow users to
                                                    quickly and easily determine which element properties in a component
                                                    are relevant for machining tasks. By simply clicking on a surface, users
                                                    receive important information on the surface type (radius, plane, free-
                                                    form surface), minimum and maximum radius, position and angle as well
                                                    as picking point coordinates for the selected frame system. When two
                                                    elements are selected, the function displays the minimum distance and
                                                    angle between the two surfaces.

                                                    In addition to analysing individual surfaces, hyperMILL® can automati-
                                                    cally search for all planes and radii on a component and also mark their
                                                    positions and sizes accordingly.

                                                    Various machining data, such as machining type or tolerances, are
                                                    often compiled into standardised colour tables. These can be stored in
                                                    hyperMILL® so that users have easy access to tolerance and fit data for
                                                    holes or other geometries to be machined in a component.

                                                    Manual positioning of any tool allows users to quickly and easily check
                                                    whether areas that are difficult to access can be machined and, if so, at
                                                    which angle. To do this, any tool defined in hyperMILL® can be moved to
                                                    any position and freely rotated around all axes. Thanks to the tool length
                                                    optimisation analysis function, a CAD model can be checked for colli-
                                                    sions as long as collision checking is activated and the milling area is
                                                    defined. Furthermore, the user has the option of importing the tool and
                                                    frame to be analysed directly from an existing job, or exporting a frame to
                                                    the hyperMILL® frame list.

           Analysis of existing radii on component  Tool length optimisation  Tool positioning and collision checking

54
                                                Stock tracking and management                                              GeneraÜlbfeurngrcteifoennsde Funktionen

                                                 S imple, transparent monitoring of the machining status

                                                Stock tracking allows calculating the machining status for each single
                                                job, for any number of freely selected jobs or for the entire job list.
                                                Stock models are maintained, independent of the reference frame for
                                                a machining job and can be used to limit the machining area. Job list-
                                                oriented stock tracking and management guarantee extremely precise
                                                and efficient material removal. Stock is automatically updated via all
                                                turning and milling operations.

                                                The compound stock function allows for machining multiple components,
                                                each of which have their own stock, at the same time. The different
                                                stocks are combined together, allowing a component (and stock) to be
                                                machined free of collision in relation to the completely assembled stock.

                                                Calculated stock is shown in a separate window and managed in the
                                                job list. Stock can be used for visual checks as well as for any further
                                                machining, such as the roughing of arbitrary stock. Stock can be saved
                                                in a CAD-neutral STL format.

Stock calculation following each machining job
Job list with stock management

                                                Milling/stop surfaces

                                                 M ore exact machining, flexible and accurate limiting
                                                   of machining areas, increased precision

                                                In addition to employing the conventional boundary method to define
                                                the machining area, milling and stop surfaces can be used as well. By
                                                selecting the milling surfaces, the user directly defines the areas to be
                                                machined with a few clicks of the mouse. You can also specify the milling
                                                area using bounding curves and stop surfaces. During the machining
                                                process, tools will not come into contact with stop surfaces.

Precise area definition using stop surfaces                                                                                55
                                Transformations

                                 F or reproducing machining jobs on identical or
                                   similar geometries

                                Using transformations, it is possible to reproduce programs for ma-
                                chining identical or similar geometries within a component or several
                                identical components that are clamped together. By freely transforming
                                machining steps across spatial coordinates, users can simplify their pro-
                                gramming workload and reduce costs. In other words, multiple copies of
                                machining steps can be placed along the X and Y axes or rotated around
                                a freely definable axis.

                                With transformations, users can easily and conveniently create programs
                                for multiple components clamped within a single plane or in a tombs-
                                tone fixture, for example. Since the "copies" are associated with the job
                                template, modifications to a program or geometry can be implemented
                                quickly and easily. Any changes to the job template are copied automati-
                                cally by hyperMILL® to the associated jobs. Furthermore, each parameter
                                can be modified individually. Since users can make local changes or even
                                delete parameters and dependencies, workflows remain highly flexible
                                (see also "Associative programming" on page 6).

                                Another powerful feature is that users can perform collision checks
                                relative to the finished part for programs that have been offset or rotated.
                                This means that jobs involving tombstones or multiple setups can be
                                programmed efficiently and reliably.

                                Transformations can be applied to all job steps.

    Spatial copies of programs

                                Copies of program sections for components with identical elements

56
                                                    Mirroring                                                                                                      General functions

                                                                     C reates symmetrical geometries or geometrical planes in
                                                                        components and determines entire machining programs for
                                                                        mirrored components

                                                                            In contrast to simple mirroring actions performed by machine control-
                                                                            lers, h yperMILL® does not merely mirror the NC paths. An independent
                                                                            toolpath is calculated for the mirrored geometry including modified
                                                                            technology values. Climb milling movements remain intact. Automatic
                                                                            approach and retract strategies, curve orientations and optimised infeed
                                                                            movements are taken into consideration in mirrored jobs.
                                                                            Mirroring automatically creates an associated element in a browser. Any
                                                                            changes to the original are automatically applied to the mirrored versi-
                                                                            ons. Again, every parameter can also be modified individually if required.
                                                                            Mirroring can be applied to all job steps as well as to the entire job list.

Geometry and boundaries are mirrored

                                                                                                                                                                 57
           Collision-checked link          Job linking

           Machining with production mode   F or intelligent links between jobs and effective reduction
                                              of transition moves
58
                                           Multiple job steps to be machined with the same tool can be combined
                                           into a single step using job linking. Here, each of the job steps remains
                                           unchanged. h yperMILL® calculates the NC toolpaths between these steps
                                           with respect to the workpiece and performs a collision check. Each job
                                           link is established independently of the type of machining (2D, 3D and
                                           5AXIS machining) and machining direction. Even undercut areas can be
                                           approached safely with job linking.
                                           This unique function allows users to combine multiple strategies into a
                                           single processing cycle. This gets rid of retraction movements between
                                           the individual operations and significantly reduces machining times

                                                                       With and without job linking

                                           Production mode

                                            A utomatic optimisation of transition moves for shortest
                                              possible machining times of standard parts

                                           Production mode is a new function that lets you minimise all transition
                                           moves within a job. h yperMILL® automatically optimises fast travel move-
                                           ments according to the path length by stepping over or sideways around
                                           the geometry to the starting point of the next path. Lateral movements
                                           help to avoid unnecessary infeed movements at the Z-level that are
                                           mostly performed with reduced feedrates. By including the stock in the
                                           collision calculation, h yperMILL® ensures that transition moves remain
                                           reliable.

                                                       Machining without
                                                          production mode
                                  Collision check with safety allowance                                       General functions

                                   B etter process reliability, high level of flexibility

                                  hyperMILL® detects collisions and offers efficient solutions for collision
                                  avoidance. NC tools can be described in a very detailed manner, includ-
                                  ing holder, tool shank, any number of extensions and a spindle protec-
                                  tion area. Different geometries can be used for calculation and simula-
                                  tion. Depending on the tool and machining strategy, there are different
                                  options available for collision control and prevention. To be on the safe
                                  side, tool components that are not selected for collision checking are
                                  highlighted.

                                  When performing a collision check against the model, different safety al-
                                  lowances can be defined for all tool components (spindle areas, holders,
                                  extensions and shanks). This makes the evaluation of different pre-ma-
                                  chining conditions very easy. The geometry of the tool elements does not
                                  have to be changed for collision safety.

Definition with safety allowance

Tool length calculation           Tool length calculation

                                   E xtended tool definition and collision checks

                                  This function, based on the default tool length, calculates both the
                                  necessary maximum and minimum tool reach required to avoid collisions
                                  whilst maintaining rigidity in the tool. The extend function calculates the
                                  Larger reach. The shorten optimisation function calculates the clamping
                                  length of the selected tool in such a way that it is not longer than abso-
                                  lutely necessary and does not fall below the minimal length. If a longer
                                  tool is required, the area is left out or the calculation is cancelled.

                                                                                                                              59
                                                    Fully automated collision avoidance

                                                     Skipping toolpath areas, changing tool orientation during
                                                       a ctive collision avoidance

                                                    Fully automatic collision avoidance is an active type of collision avoid-
                                                    ance that independently attempts to determine a collision-free tool
                                                    angle. During roughing, for example, the paths can be moved laterally,
                                                    thereby allowing greater machining depths. During finishing with 5axis
                                                    simultaneous machining, hyperMILL® uses fully automated modifications
                                                    of the tool orientation to prevent collisions. Tool orientation modifica-
                                                    tion can be performed either in 5axis simultaneous machining or via
                                                    automatic indexing. Moreover, it is possible to cancel machining or skip
                                                    toolpaths with collisions in order to mill them with longer tool lengths
                                                    and/or modified tool angles.

    Checking and avoiding collisions

                                                    Tool length calculation  5axis simultaneous milling

                                                    Selectable axes for avoiding collisions

                                                     T aking account of machine kinematics

                                                    The programmer can specify, in reference to the component and
                                                    the m achine kinematics, which of the two rotary axes is preferred
                                                    for c ollision avoidance. Several options are provided:
                                                    n Only the C-axis is used ­ the fifth (A/B) axis is on a fixed inclination
                                                    n T he C axis is used in preference to the A/B axis
                                                    n Only the A/B axis is used ­ the tool on the C axis strictly follows the

                                                       guide data
                                                    n T he A/B axis is used in preference to the C axis

                                                    In addition to simpler programming and taking account of machine
                                                    kinematics, minimised axis movements provide for more consistent
                                                    tool movements.

60  Selectable axis for smoother machine movements
Freely definable tool holders         Tool database                                                                General functions
Freely definable tool extensions ...
                                       E xtensive definitions of tools using technology data

                                      hyperMILL® comes equipped with a fully redesigned tool database. Tools
                                      can now be defined with greater versatility and much more realistically.
                                      Complete tools can be imported, individual tools can be defined and
                                      complete tools including holders can be custom-assembled. To fully
                                      assemble a tool, freely definable tool extensions are available with corre-
                                      sponding coupling systems.

                                      By entering the technology data for tool extensions, copying tools into a
                                      job list automatically changes the corresponding technology values.

                                      In addition to the material-specific cutting data, users can also create
                                      various profiles for each tool defined in the database. Thus, different
                                      applications can be predefined and selected in the job steps ­ even for
                                      the same workpiece and cutting materials.

                                      A neutral data exchange format is available for importing and exporting
                                      tool data. Input synchronisation enables automatic data reconciliation
                                      with other database systems.

... Corresponding coupling systems

                                                                                                                                                                61
      Feature and
      macro technologies

             With feature and macro technologies,
             hyperMILL® users can standardise and
             a utomate the programming of geometries.
             It offers many options for using CAD geome-
             try information for CAM programming and
             to define typical and repeating geometries
             as a feature. Anewfeaturetype,thecus-
             tomised process feature, is used to define
             job templates and operating standards.

62
63  Feature and macro technologies
                                           Automatic feature recognition

                                            D etection of geometries, creation of boundaries, leading
                                              curves and profiles, as well as grouping of surfaces and holes

                                           Automatic feature recognition detects geometries from solids and sur-
                                           face models, such as holes, stepped holes with and without threads and
                                           open and closed pockets. Parameters are automatically generated that
                                           are required for the programming of machining strategies and for tool
                                           selection.

                                           Features can be automatically or manually grouped, for example based
                                           on type, diameter or workplane. Various filters support the grouping
                                           function. Because features are summarised in different ways within
                                           a group, programs for multi-axis indexing can be generated without
                                           additional programming work.

Applicable in 2D, 3D and 5axis operations

                                           Feature mapping

                                            Importing of features from solids

                                           The feature mapping function is used to search for drilling geometries
                                           such as holes and threads from the feature-tree of a solid with all the
                                           detailed parameters in one step. Application of colours and viewing
                                           bookmarks can be used to add further intelligence to the data and en-
                                           hance the application of the geometry features.

           Feature mapping on solids

64
                                                            Hole features                                                                Feature and macro technologies

                                                             H ole detection

                                                            Within a defined area, the user can search parts for simple holes and
                                                            stepped holes. hyperMILL® also recognises features such as threads and
                                                            ISO fits if these were saved in a colour table. The search for and grouping
                                                            of hole features can be controlled using filters, for example according to
                                                            hole diameter or required workplane. The 5axis drilling option makes it
                                                            possible to machine holes with different orientations together in a single
                                                            operation.

Detection of various holes

Definition of simple holes as through holes or blind holes

Definition of sink holes as cylinder, cone and stepped

Free definition of holes                                    Definition of multi-axis holes                                               65
                                             Pocket feature

                                              A utomatic pocket recognition

                                             Pocket feature recognition detects closed pockets, pockets with islands,
                                             pockets with open sides, completely open pockets (Z-level and break-
                                             through) and assigns the corresponding machining depth. Sorting and
                                             grouping occurs automatically based on workplanes and tool inclina-
                                             tions.

                                             In automatic mode, any closed breakthroughs within the model are
                                             detected. In manual mode, users can specify the start and end points to
                                             also detect open areas or separate breakthroughs.

Closed and open pockets

Open pockets without flooring

           Pockets without a bottom surface

66
Manual feature definition  Feature programming                                                        Feature and macro technologies

                            E fficient, automated programming

                           Along with the assigned geometries, features contain all information
                           relevant to production, such as top, bottom and start point. These are
                           defined once and can then be assigned to the machining strategy. If the
                           geometry or stored technology parameters are changed while program-
                           ming, the changes need only be made in the feature. The adjustments
                           made to the feature receive the status "update" for renewed job calcula-
                           tions. They are accounted for automatically during a new calculation.

                           Feature browser

                            F eature management

                           The feature browser simplifies the use of features. Users can work with
                           several feature lists at once without losing the overview. For easier
                           identification, features can be displayed in different colours and can be
                           sorted by type, depth, diameter as well as by used and unused features.
                           Features can be found quickly and easily by placing bookmarks.

Transparent display of different features
or machining sides

                                                                                                                                                                67
                                                            Macro technology

                                                                               L inking machining strategies and tools with features

                                                                                      With macros, programs can be generated faster and easier than ever.
                                                                                      Macros link machining strategies and tools for characteristic geometries.
                                                                                      They may consist of one or more jobs. They contain the machining rules
                                                                                      for characteristic areas of the corresponding feature, such as thread dia-
                                                                                      meter, sink type and depth, and open or closed pockets. Once machining
                                                                                      sequences are stored, they are automatically assigned to the current geo-
                                                                                      metries of the selected feature.

                                                            Macro database

                                                                               P roduction know-how saved in an easy-to-follow manner

                                                                                      Macros are stored in a database and can be recalled at any time.
                                                                                      In addition to macros, the database can also hold images and notes.
                                                                                      These are used to document jobs and ensure a well-structured,
                                                                                      transparent workflow. This allows macro content to be understood
                                                                                      at any time by any user.

                                        Technology database

68
                  CPF ­ Customized Process Features (optional)                                  Feature and macro technologies

Selection script   A utomation of CAM programming and definition of company-
                     specific machining standards

                  Extended feature technology allows users to define any type of complex
                  machining sequence and store it as a technology macro so that it can
                  be quickly and easily applied to various similar machining tasks. This is
                  based on process-oriented links between characteristic geometries with
                  freely definable sequences of various machining strategies ­ from 2D, 3D
                  and 5AXIS milling to turning.

                  The same elements can be used in various work steps for different tasks.
                  For instance, a surface selection can be used as a stop surface in one
                  step and a milling surface in the next step.

                  The various geometry elements can be selected manually in the model
                  or selected automatically by defining selection rules. Thus similarly struc-
                  tured external data can be used to quickly program similar components
                  or for making design changes later on.

                  To facilitate a transparent and easy-to-understand workflow, selections
                  can be named individually, and help texts and explanatory screenshots
                  can be saved.

Operating screen for Customized Process Features

                                                                                                                                                                69
      Post-processors
      and simulation

             hyperMILL® is able to calculate tool paths
             independently of machine and controller.
             The post-processor takes this neutral data
             and creates NC programs that are adapted
             optimally to the machine, controller and
             components used.

             A comprehensive machine and material
             removal simulation enables reliable work-
             space monitoring and collision check in
             advance.

70
71  PP and simulation
                                                            Post-processor technology

                                                                               T ransformation of machine-neutral toolpaths into NC paths
                                                                                 adapted to the machine and controller

                                                                                      Because of complex and subtle differences in controllers and machines,
                                                                                      as well as individual workpiece requirements, post-processors that have
                                                                                      been developed based on customer needs provide the best solutions.
                                                                                      Thanks to its customised development, a single post-processor can be
                                                                                      offered for all operations from 2D, 3D and 5axis machining to mill turning.
                                                                                      hyperMILL® post-processors integrate the complex functionalities
                                                                                      of NC controllers, such as:
                                                                                      n 2 D canned cycles
                                                                                      n 2 D tool radius compensation
                                                                                      n Parameters, such as those for feedrate values
                                                                                      n S ub-routines
                                                                                      n P rogram part repetitions
                                                                                      n Workplane shifts and tilts
                                                                                      n 5axis simultaneous machining
                                                                                      Even machines of the same type have differences that need to be taken
                                                                                      into consideration, especially for multi-axis and 5axis machining.
                                                                                      n Support of nutated rotary axes
                                                                                      n Serrated rotary axes
                                                                                      n L imited angle range for the rotary axis
                                                                                      n Correction of linear offsets depending

                                                                                         on the rotational angle (RTCP/TCPM)
                                                                                      n S hortest rotation paths

           Post-processors adapted to the machines, controllers and workpieces used

72
                                                    Simulation                                                                  PP and simulation

                                                     A ssessment of the created CAM program

                                                    The graphical simulation of the machining job enables the visual exami-
                                                    nation of the CAM program created. By turning off milling paths for one or
                                                    several jobs, overlaps can be prevented. Individual paths are thus better
                                                    displayed and easier to control.

Machining simulation

                                                    Machine and material removal simulation

                                                     W orkspace monitoring and collision testing

Complete simulation including holder, fixing setup  Machine and material removal simulation makes it possible to conduct
and workpiece                                       a detailed monitoring of the workspace. The user can specifically check
                                                    for potential collisions by looking at the workpiece, holder, fixturing
                                                    setup and machine movements. In the process, the user can also select
                                                    whether the simulation should also test for collisions such as:

                                                    n Machine against workpiece
                                                    n Machine against tool
                                                    n M achine against machine
                                                    n M achine against holder
                                                    n T ool against workpiece
                                                    n S etup against machine
                                                    n Setup against holder
                                                    n Setup against tool
                                                    n Holder against model

                                                    Collisions are displayed in colour and all NC areas where collisions could
                                                    occur are saved as a list. If necessary, the CAM program alone can be
                                                    simulated.

                                                                                                                                                73
                          2D        3D  3+2  Autoindex      5-axis    HSC Stock calculation
    Turn roughing/                                      simultaneous

                                                                        

    Turn finishing                                                      

    Groove turning                                                      

    Thread cutting                                                      

    Centre drilling                                                     

    Drilling (with chip breaks)                                         

    Deep hole drilling                                                  

    Thread drilling and milling                                         

    Face milling                                                        

    Pocket milling                                                      

    Arbitrary stock roughing                                            

    Profile finishing                                                   

    Z-level finishing                                                   

    Complete finishing                                                  

    Equidistant finishing                                               

    ISO machining                                                       

    Rework machining                                                    

    Fillet machining                                                    

    Automatic rest machining                                            

    Free path milling                                                   

    Cutting edge                                                        

    Top milling                                                         

    Swarf cutting                                                       

    Contour machining                                                   

    Tube roughing                                                       

    Tube finishing                                                      

    Tube rest machining                                                 

    Blade top milling                                                   

    Blade swarf cutting                                                 

    Blade transition radius                                             

    Multiblade plunge roughing                                          

    Multiblade roughing                                                 

    Multiblade floor finishing                                          

    Multiblade blade point contact                                      

    Multiblade blade flank contact                                      

    Multiblade edge machining                                           

74  Multiblade fillet milling                                           
Flexible                                                               Strategy overview
Programming
with hyperMILL®

hyperMILL®'s wide range of machining
strategies makes programming extremely
flexible. Continuous processes are made
possible with the solutions which are
seamlessly integrated in hyperCAD®,
SOLIDWORKS and Autodesk® Inventor®.
hyperMILL® is available in the following
versions:
· h yperMILL® 2D basic package
· h yperMILL® Classic (2D and 3D strategies)
· h yperMILL® Expert

  (2D/3D strategies and HSC machining)
· hyperMILL® 5AXIS (5axis strategies)
· Special Applications
· h yperMILL® millTURN

  (Mill/turn strategies)

                                                                     75
              Contact

Headquarters  OPEN MIND Technologies AG
              Argelsrieder Feld 5 · 82234 Wessling · Germany
              Phone: +49 8153 933-500
              E-mail: I nfo.Europe@openmind-tech.com

                       Support.Europe@openmind-tech.com

UK            OPEN MIND Technologies UK Ltd.

              Units 1 and 2 · Bicester Business Park

              Telford Road · Bicester · Oxfordshire OX26 4LN · UK

              Phone: +44 1869 290003

              E-mail: Info.UK@openmind-tech.com

USA           OPEN MIND Technologies USA, Inc.

              1492 Highland Avenue, Unit 3 · Needham MA 02492 · USA

              Phone: +1 888 516-1232

              E-mail: Info.Americas@openmind-tech.com

Brazil        OPEN MIND Tecnologia Brasil LTDA
              Av. Andromeda, 885 SL2021
              06473-000 · Alphaville Empresarial
              Barueri · Sao Paulo · Brasil
              Phone: +55 11 2424 8580
              E-mail: Info.Brazil@openmind-tech.com

Asia Pacific  OPEN MIND Technologies Asia Pacific Pte. Ltd.
              33 Ubi Avenue 3 #06-32 · Vertex (Tower B)
              Singapore 408868 · Singapore
              Phone: +65 6742 95-56
              E-mail: I nfo.Asia@openmind-tech.com

China         OPEN MIND Technologies China Co. Ltd.
              Suite 1608 · Zhong Rong International Plaza
              No. 1088 South Pudong Road
              Shanghai 200120 · China
              Phone: +86 21 588765-72
              E-mail: I nfo.China@openmind-tech.com

India         OPEN MIND CADCAM Technologies India Pvt. Ltd.

              #369/4, 1st Floor · 2nd Cross · 1st `B' Main Road

              7th Block, Jayanagar (W) Bangalore ­ 560070                     Imprint

              Karnataka · India                                               © OPEN MIND Technologies AG.
                                                                              All rights reserved.
              Phone: +91 80 2676 6999                                         Issue: April 2019.
                                                                              Reproduction in any form is
              E-mail: Info.India@openmind-tech.com                            prohibited except with the
                                                                              express written permission of
Japan         OPEN MIND Technologies Japan K.K.                               OPEN MIND Technologies AG.
              Misumi Bldg. 3F · 1-17-18, Kichijojihigashicho
              Musashino-shi · Tokyo 180-0002 · Japan                          Publisher:
              Phone: +81 422 23-5305                                          OPEN MIND Technologies AG
              E-mail: info.jp@openmind-tech.co.jp                             Argelsrieder Feld 5
                                                                              D-82234 Wessling
Taiwan        OPEN MIND Technologies Taiwan Inc.                              E-Mail: info@openmind-tech.com
              Rm. F, 4F., No.1, Yuandong Rd., Banqiao Dist.                   www.openmind-tech.com
              New Taipei City 22063 · Taiwan
              Phone: +886 2 2957-6898                                         OPEN MIND Technologies AG ­
              E-mail: Info.Taiwan@openmind-tech.com                           a member of the Mensch und
                                                                              Maschine technology group
              OPEN MIND Technologies AG is represented worldwide with own
              subsidiaries and through competent partners and is a member of
              the Mensch und Maschine technology group, www.mum.de

              www.openmind-tech.com
