eCTnhNgeECiCcnnTNmgoehCimeaenrcpmienhCaleegoicrntmhigeipinnulnggieid:tnGeegu:ide

Learn all you need to know about CNC machining in 25 minutes or less.
Whether you're an eperienced design engineer or just getting started with
CNC, this guideLeisarfonr yaolyulo.u need to okwn about CNC machining in 25 meisnuotresls. Whetheyrou are anexperienced

                                                design engineer or just gettatrtiendg wsith CCN, this guidfeoriysou.

                                                                                                                                                                            1
Table of contents

Part 1

The basics

                    5. What is CNC machining?
                             A brief history of CNC machining

                    6. Types of CNC machines
                             3-ais CNC machines
                             5-ais CNC machining
                             Summary

                   12. Benets and limitations of CNC machining
                             Benets of CNC machining
                             Limitations of CNC machining

                   14. Applications of CNC machining
                             CNC machining vs. 3D printing
                             Scaling up production

Part 2                                                            CNC machining design restrictions
                                                                  Design rules for CNC machining
Design for CNC                                                    Designing undercuts
machining

                                                             19.
                                                             20.
                                                             22.

2
Part 3

Materials for CNC
machining
                24. Materials for CNC machining

                   Metals

                   Plastics

                   Surface nishes

Part 4

Cost reduction
tips
                30. Tips to keep your CNC project on budget

                   Tip #1: Increase the size of all llets or add
                   undercuts to sharp edges

                   Tip #2: Minimize the number of machine
                   orientations

                   Tip #3: Consider the cost of the material

Part 5          35. Step 1:
                          Export your design to a CNC-compatible CAD
Start CNC                 le format
machining
                36. Step 2:
                          Prepare a technical drawing

                37. Step 3:
                          Get an instant quote and start manufacturing

Part 6

Useful resources

                                                             39. Knowledge base
                                                                       Learn to machine
                                                                       Other guides

                                                                                                                                                                            3
Part 1

The basics

What is CNC machining? What are the dierent types of CNC
machines? How do they work? In this section, we answer all these
questions and compare CNC machining to other manufacturing
technologies to help you nd the best solution for your application.

4
What is CNC machining?

CNC (Computer Numerical Control) machining is a subtractive
manufacturing technology: parts are created by removing material
from a solid block (called the blank or the workpiece) using a
variety of cutting tools.

This is a fundamentally dierent way of man-     Almost every material can be CNC machined.
ufacturing compared to additive (3D printing)   The most common eamples include metals
or formative (injection molding) technologies.  (aluminum and steel alloys, brass etc.) and
The material removal mechanisms have signif-    plastics (ABS, Delrin, Nylon etc.). Foam, com-
icant implications on the benets, limitations   posites and wood can also be machined.
and design restrictions of CNC.
                                                  The basic CNC process can be broken
  CNC machining is a digital manufacturing      down into 3 steps. The engineer rst designs
technology: it produces high-accuracy parts     the CAD model of the part. The machinists
with ecellent physical properties directly      then turn the CAD le into a CNC program
from a CAD le.                                  (G-code) and set up the machine.

  Due to the high level of automation, CNC        Finally, the CNC system eecutes all ma-
is price-competitive for both one-o cus-        chining operations with little supervision, re-
tom parts and medium-volume productions.        moving material and creating the part.

                                                                                                 5
A brief history of CNC machining

                                                                                                > The earliest machined object ever discovered
                                                                                                           was a bowl found in Italy and made in 700 B.C.
                                                                                                           using a lathe.
                                                                                                > Attempts to automate machining started in
                                                                                                           the 18th century. These machines were purely
                                                                                                           mechanical and powered by steam.
                                                                                                > The rst programmable machine was devel-
                                                                                                           oped in the late 40s in MIT. It used punched
                                                                                                           cards to encode each movement.
                                                                                                > The proliferation of computers in the 50s and
                                                                                                           60s added the "C" in CNC and radically changed
                                                                                                           the manufacturing industry.
                                                                                                > Today, CNC machines are advanced robotic
                                                                                                           systems with multi-ais and multi-tooling capa-
                                                                                                           bilities.

Types of CNC machines

In this guide, we will focus on CNC machines that remove material using
cutting tools. These are the most common and have the widest range of
applications. Other CNC machines include laser cutters, plasma cutters
and EDM machines.

6
3-axis CNC machines

CNC milling and CNC turning machines are eamples of 3-ais CNC sys-
tems. These "basic" machines allow the movement of the cutting tool in 3
linear aes relative to the workpiece (left-right, back-forth and up-down).

                                                                CNC milling

                                                                > The workpiece is held stationary directly on the machine bed
                                                                       or in a vice.
                                                                > Material is removed from the workpiece using cutting tools
                                                                       or drills that rotate at high speed.
                                                                > The tools are attached to a spindle, which can move along 3
                                                                       linear aes.

3-ais CNC milling machines are very common, as they can be used to
produce most common geometries. They are relatively easy to program
and operate, so start-up machining costs are relatively low.

  Tool access can be a design restriction in CNC milling. As there are only
3 aes to work with, certain areas might be impossible to reach. This isn't
a big issue if the workpiece needs to be rotated just once, but if multiple
rotations are needed the labor and machining costs increase fast.

Pros                                  Cons

· Can produce most parts with simple  · Tool access and workholding design restrictions
      geometries                            apply

· High accuracy and tight tolerances  · Manual repositioning of the workpiece lowers the
                                            achievable accuracy

                                                                                                                                7
                                                                CNC turning (lathes)

                                                                > The workpiece is held on the spindle while rotating at high
                                                                       speed.
                                                                > A cutting tool or center drill traces the outer or inner perim-
                                                                       eter of the part, forming the geometry.
                                                                > The tool does not rotate and moves along polar directions
                                                                       (radially and lengthwise).

CNC lathes are etensively used, because they can produce parts at a
much higher rate and at a lower cost per unit than CNC mills. This is espe-
cially relevant for larger volumes.

  The main design restriction of CNC lathes is that they can only produce
parts with a cylindrical prole (think screws or washers). To overcome this
limitation, features of the part are often CNC milled in a separate machin-
ing step. Alternatively, 5-ais mill-turning CNC centers can be used to
produce the same geometry in one step.

Pros                                          Cons

· Lowest cost per part compared to all other  · Can only produce parts with rotational symmetry
      CNC machining operations                      and simple geometries

· Very high production capabilities

8
5-axis CNC machines

Multi-ais CNC machining centers come in 3 variations: 5-ais indeed
CNC milling, continuous 5-ais CNC milling and mill-turning centers with
live tooling.

  These systems are essentially milling machines or lathes enhanced with
additional degrees of freedom. For eample, 5-ais CNC milling centers
allow the rotation of the machine bed or the toolhead (or both) in addition
to the 3 linear aes of movement.

  The advanced capabilities of these machines come at an increased cost.
They require both specialized machinery and operators with epert knowl-
edge. For highly comple or topology optimized metal parts, 3D printing is
usually a more suitable option.

                                                     Continuous 5-axis CNC milling

                                                                > The cutting tool can move along 3 linear and 2 rotation-
                                                                       al aes relative to the workpiece.
                                                                > All 5 aes can move at the same during all machining
                                                                       operations.

Continuous 5-ais CNC milling systems have a similar machine architec-
ture to indeed 5-ais CNC milling machines.

  But they allow for the movement of all 5 aes at the same time during all
machining operations. This way, it's possible to produce parts with com-
ple, `organic' geometries that can't be manufactured at the achieved level
of accuracy with any other technology.

  These advanced capabilities come at a high cost, of course, as both
epensive machinery and highly-trained machinists are needed.

Pros                                                 Cons

· Manufactures comple parts at a level of accu-      · Highest cost per part of all CNC machines
      racy that's impossible with any other process  · Tool access restrictions still apply

· Produces very smooth `organic' surfaces with
      minimal machining marks

                                                                                                                            9
                                                     Indexed 5-axis CNC milling

                                                     > During machining, the cutting tool can only move along 3
                                                     linear aes.
                                                     > Between operations, the bed and the toolhead can rotate,
                                                     giving access to the workpiece from a dierent angle.

Indeed 5-ais CNC milling systems are also known as 3+2 CNC milling
machines, since they are using the 2 additional degrees of freedom only
between machining operations to rotate the workpiece.

  The key benet of these systems is they eliminate the need to manually
reposition the workpiece. Meaning parts with more comple geometries
can be manufactured faster and at higher accuracy than in a 3-ais CNC
mill. But they lack the true freeform capabilities of continuous 5-ais CNC
machines.

Pros                                                 Cons

· Eliminates the need for manual repositioning       · Higher cost than 3-ais CNC machining
· Produces parts with features that don't align      · Can't produce very accurately contoured surfaces

      with one of the main aes at a higher accuracy

                                                     Mill-turning CNC centers

                                                     > The workpiece is attached to a spindle that can either rotate
                                                     at high speed (like a lathe) or position it at a precise angle (like
                                                     a 5-ais CNC mill).
                                                     > Lathe and milling cutting tools are used to remove material
                                                     from the workpiece, forming the part.

Mill-turning CNC centers are essentially CNC lathe machines equipped
with CNC milling tools. A variation of the mill-turning centers are swiss-
style lathes, which have typically higher precision.

  Mill-turning systems take advantage of both the high productivity of
CNC turning and the geometric eibility of CNC milling. They are ideal
for manufacturing parts with `loose' rotational symmetry (think camshafts
and centrifugal impellers) at a much lower cost than other 5-ais CNC
machining systems.

Pros                                                 Cons

· Lowest cost of all 5-ais CNC machining systems     · Tool access restrictions still apply
· High production capabilities and design freedom    · Most suitable for parts with a cylindrical outline
10
To summarize

> 3-ais CNC milling machines manufacture parts with relatively simple
geometries with ecellent accuracy and at a low cost.
> CNC lathes have the lowest cost per unit, but are only suitable for part
geometries with rotational symmetry.
> Indeed 5-ais CNC milling machines manufacture parts with features
that don't align with one of the main aes quickly and with very high accu-
racy.

> Continuous 5-ais CNC milling machines manufacture parts with highly
comple, `organic' geometries and smooth contours, but at a high cost.
> Mill-turning CNC centers combine the benets of CNC turning and
CNC milling into a single system to manufacture comple parts at a lower
cost than other 5-ais CNC systems.

Use the table below for a rough estimate of the cost per hour of the dier-
ent CNC machines. The cost is presented relative to that of a 3-ais CNC
milling machine, which is typically $75 per hour.

CNC machine type              Machining cost

CNC milling (3-ais)           $75 ( baseline for comparison )
CNC turning (lathe)           $65 ( - 15% )
Indeed 5-ais CNC milling      $120 ( + 60% )
Continuous 5-ais CNC milling  $150 ( + 100% )
Mill-turning CNC centers      $95 ( + 25% )

                                                                            11
Benets and limitations
of CNC machining

Here's a list of the key strengths and limitations of CNC machining. You can
use it to help you decide whether CNC maching is the right technology for
your application.

Benets of CNC machining

Small-to-medium production

CNC machining is a very price-competitive option for manufacturing
small-to-medium volumes (from 10-1000 parts). In fact, when ordering 10
identical parts, the unit price is cut by about 70% compared to a one-o
part.

  This is because `economies of scale' start to kick in: the relatively high
start-up costs of CNC are spread over multiple parts. In contrast, additive
technologies (3D printing) do not scale as well for higher volumes - the
unit price is relatively stable.

  Formative technologies (injection molding or investment casting) only
make economic sense for production volumes in the 1000s as they have
very high start-up costs.

Excellent material properties

CNC machined parts have ecellent physical properties, identical to the
bulk material. This makes CNC machining the ideal technology for appli-
cations where high-performance is essential.

  Additionally, virtually every common material with enough hardness can
be CNC machined. This gives engineers the eibility to select a material
with optimal properties for their application.

One-o custom parts and prototypes

In contrast to formative technologies (injection molding), CNC machining
doesn't need any special tooling. So the on-demand production of cus-
tom one-o parts and prototypes is economically viable.

  This is especially relevant for one-o custom metal parts and proto-
types, where CNC is the most cost-competitive solution.

Quick turnaround times

The advances of modern CNC systems, CAM software and digital supply
chains have greatly accelerated the production times.

  Now CNC machined parts are typically ready for delivery within 5
days. This is comparable to the turnaround of industrial 3D printing pro-
cesses, such as SLS.
12
Highly accurate parts with tight tolerances

CNC machining can create parts with greater dimensional accuracy than
most other common manufacturing technologies. During the nal nishing
machining steps, material can be removed from the workpiece very accu-
rately, achieving etremely tight tolerances.

  The standard tolerance of any dimension in CNC machining is ± 0.125
mm. Features with tighter tolerances down to ± 0.050 mm can be manu-
factured and even tolerances of ± 0.025 mm are feasible. That's about a
quarter the width of a human hair!

Limitations of CNC machining

Relatively high start-up costs

In CNC machining, start-up costs are mainly connected to process plan-
ning. This step requires manual input from an epert, so start-up costs are
usually relatively high when compared to, for eample, 3D printing, where
process planning is highly automated.

  However, these costs are still much lower than formative manufactur-
ing processes (injection molding or investment casting), which require the
preparation of custom tooling.

  It's important to keep in mind that the start-up costs are ed. There's
an opportunity to signicantly reduce the unit price per part by taking ad-
vantage of `economies of scale', as we saw above.

Geometric complexity has a high cost

Being a subtractive technology, machining comple geometries comes
at an increased cost. It's also restricted by the mechanics of the cutting
process.

  Parts with comple geometries either require the use of a multi-axis
CNC machining system or manual labor from the machinist (reposition-
ing, realigning etc.). To help you keep the price of CNC machined parts to
a minimum, we've compiled a list of design tips.

Tool access and workholding restrictions

Since a part is produced by removing material from a solid block, a cutting
tool with a suitable geometry has to eist. It should also be able to access
all necessary surfaces.

  For this reason, parts with internal geometries or very steep undercuts,
for eample, can't be machined. Holding the workpiece securely in place
is essential for CNC machining and introduces a certain design limitation.
Improper workholding or a workpiece with low stiness can lead to vibra-
tions during machining.

  This results in parts with lower dimensional accuracy. Comple geome-
tries might require custom jigs or tures.

                                                                                                                                                                           13
Applications of CNC machining

Here are some eamples of how and why CNC machining is used for a
range of dierent applications.

                                                                Space

                                                                       CNC machining is one of the very few manufacturing processes that's
                                                                       suitable for creating parts for space applications. Not only because CNC
                                                                       parts have ecellent accuracy and material properties, but also because of
                                                                       the wide range of surface treatments that can be applied to the parts after
                                                                       machining.

                                                                          For eample, KEPLER used CNC machining and space grade materials
                                                                       to go from a sketch on a napkin to a satellite in space in 12 months.

                                                                Aerospace

                                                                       Aerospace was one of the rst industries to use CNC machining. This is
                                                                       because CNC machining can manufacture lightweight parts with ecellent
                                                                       physical properties and very tight tolerances. CNC machining is used both
                                                                       for aircraft parts and during the development stages.

                                                                          For eample, Tomas Sinnige is a PhD researcher at the Delft University
                                                                       of Technology. With his team of researchers, Tomas used CNC machining
                                                                       to manufacture scaled-down versions of their prototype engine, with the
                                                                       goal of increasing the eciency of modern propeller engines.

                                                                Automotive

                                                                       CNC machining is most used in the automotive industry when manufac-
                                                                       turing high-performance custom parts is required.

                                                                          For eample, the Dutch company PAL-V designs Personal Air and Land
                                                                       Vehicles. These are essentially the world's rst ying cars. During the de-
                                                                       velopment stages, they chose CNC machining to prototype and manufac-
                                                                       ture key components.

                                                                Product design and development

                                                                       The ability to quickly manufacture custom metal parts with great dimen-
                                                                       sional accuracy, makes CNC machining an attractive option for producing
                                                                       functional prototypes. This is essential during later stages of design and
                                                                       development.

                                                                          The design team of DAQRI, for instance, used CNC machining to pro-
                                                                       totype their professional Augmented Reality (AR) hardware. They select-
                                                                       ed this process as it was the most cost-competitive solution capable of
                                                                       producing custom metal parts with the required level of detail and at the
                                                                       small-scale needed for their designs.
14
Electrical and electronic
CNC machining has many applications in the electrical and electronic
manufacturing industry: from the prototyping of PCBs to the manufactur-
ing of enclosures.

  TPAC, for eample, used CNC machining to manufacture an enclosure
for their high-power electronic sensing systems. Heat dissipation and
electrical insulation were the main design requirements in this case. So,
CNC machined, anodized aluminum was ideal for their one-o custom
enclosure.
Tooling and industrial manufacturing
A very common industrial application of CNC machining is the fabrication
of tooling for other processes. For eample, the molds in injection mold-
ing are commonly CNC machined from aluminum or tool steel. Precious
Plastic, for instance, developed a system for the developing a world that
turns waste plastic into iPhone cases! For this purpose, they used a low-
cost manual injection molder and custom CNC machined molds.

Sports and motorsports equipment
High-performance sports and motorsports manufacturers always try to
increase the performance of their products by reducing their weight.

  CAKE is a Swedish company that designed and developed the rst o-
road electric motorbike. Since it's the rst of its kind, every single compo-
nent of the motorbike was custom-made with CNC machining to achieve
the intended level of quality and durability.

                                                                                                   15
CNC machining vs. 3D printing

Both CNC machining and 3D printing are eceptional tools. However, each
technology has unique benets, and is more suitable for dierent situa-
tions. When choosing between CNC machining and 3D printing, there are
a few simple guidelines you can apply to the decision making process.

  As a general rule of thumb, parts with relatively simple geometries, that
can be manufactured with limited eort through a subtractive process,
should generally be CNC machined. Especially when it comes to produc-
ing metal parts.
Choosing 3D printing over CNC machining makes sense when you need:
> A low-cost plastic prototype
> Parts with very comple geometry
> A turnaround time of 2-5 days
> Speciality materials

To summarize:
CNC offers greater dimensional accuracy and produces parts
with better mechanical properties than 3D printing. But
this usually comes at a higher cost for low volumes and
with more design restrictions.
Read the full comparison 

16
Scaling up production

If high volumes are needed (1000s or more) neither CNC machining nor
3D printing are likely to be suitable options.

  In these cases, forming technologies, such as investment casting or
injection molding, are more economically viable due to the mechanisms of
economies of scale. For quick reference, use the table below.

  In this simplication, it's assumed that all technologies are able to pro-
duce the geometry of the part in question. When this is not the case, 3D
printing is generally the preferred method of manufacturing.

No. of Parts  Plastic                                                        Metal

1 - 10        3D printing                                                    3D printing (consider CNC machining)
10 - 100      3D printing and CNC machining                                  CNC machining
100 - 1000    CNC machining (consider injection                              CNC machining (consider investment
              molding)                                                       casting)
1000+         Injection molding                                              Investment or die casting

                                                                                                                   17
Part 2

Design for CNC machining

In less than 15 minutes, you'll learn all you need to know to
design parts optimized for CNC machining. Get familiar
with Design for Machinability (DfM) rules, cost reduction
tips, material selection guidelines, and surface nishing
recommendations.

18
CNC machining design restrictions

The design restrictions in CNC machining are a natural result of the me-
chanics of the cutting process and in particular:

                                        Tool access

                                            Surfaces that can't be reached by the cutting tool, can't be
                                            CNC machined. This prohibits the fabrication of parts with
                                            internal `hidden' geometries, for eample, and puts a limit
                                            on the maimum depth of an undercut.

                                        Tool geometry

                                            Most CNC machining cutting tools have a cylindrical shape
                                            with a at or spherical end, restricting the part geometries
                                            that can be produced.

                                               For instance, the internal vertical corners of a CNC part
                                            will always have a radius, no matter how small a cutting tool
                                            is used.

                                        Workholding

                                            The geometry of a part determines the way it will be held
                                            on the CNC machine and the number of setups required.
                                             This has an impact on the cost, but also the accuracy of a
                                            part. For eample, manual repositioning introduces a small,
                                            but signicant, positional error. This a key benet of 5-ais
                                            versus 3-ais CNC machining.

                                        Workpiece stiness

                                            Due to the cutting forces and the temperatures developed
                                            during machining, it's possible for the workpiece to deform
                                            or vibrate.

                                               This limits, for eample, the minimum wall thickness that
                                            a CNC machined part can have and the maimum aspect
                                            ratio of tall features.

                                        Tool stiness

                                            Most CNC machining cutting tools have a cylindrical shape
                                            with a at or spherical end, restricting the part geometries
                                            that can be produced.

                                               For instance, the internal vertical corners of a CNC part
                                            will always have a radius, no matter how small a cutting tool
                                            is used.

                                                                                                                                                                           19
Design rules for CNC machining

In the table below, we summarize how these restrictions translate into ac-
tionable design rules.
Read the detailed guidelines 

                                                           Tall features

                                                                         Recommended ma. ratio: height / width < 4
                                                                         Tall features are dicult to machine accurately, as they are prone to vi-
                                                                         brations. Consider the overall geometry of the part: rotating the part by
                                                                         90° degrees during machining changes the aspect ratio.

                                                           Cavities and pockets

                                                                         Recommended depth: 4  cavity width
                                                                         Feasible depth: 10  tool diameter or 25 cm (10'')
                                                                         Deeper cavities need to be machined with cutting tools with larger diam-
                                                                         eter aecting the llets of the internal edges.

                                                           Internal edges

                                                                         Recommended: larger than 1/3  cavity depth
                                                                         For internal vertical edges, the larger the llet the better. Edges on the
                                                                         oor of a cavity should be either sharp or have a 0.1 mm or 1 mm radius.

                                                           Minimum wall thickness

                                                                         Recommended: 0.8 mm (for metals)
                                                                         Feasible: 0.5 mm
                                                                         Recommended: 1.5 mm (for plastics)
                                                                         Feasible: 1.0 mm
                                                                         Decreasing the wall thickness reduces the stiness of the workpiece,
                                                                         increasing vibrations and lowering the achievable tolerances.

                                                                            Plastics are especially prone to warping and thermal softening, so a
                                                                         larger minimum wall thickness is necessary.
20
Holes

Recommended diameter: standard drill bit sizes
Recommended depth: 4  nominal diameter
Ma. depth: 10  nominal diameter
Holes with standard diameter are preferred, as they can be machined
with a standard drill bit. Blind holes machined with a drill will have a con-
ical oor. Holes with non-standard diameter will be machined with an
end mill tool and should be treated as cavities (see previous rule).

  Blind holes machined with an end mill tool will be at.

Threads

Recommended length: 3  nominal diameter
Recommended size: M6 or larger
Feasible size: M2
Choose the largest threads possible, as they are easier to machine.
Threads longer than 3 times the nominal diameter are unnecessary.

  Always design threads as cosmetic in your CAD package and include a
technical drawing with your order.

Small features

Recommended: 2.5 mm (0.100'')
Feasible: 0.100 mm (.010'')
Cavities and holes down to 2.5 mm (0.1'') can be CNC machined with
standard cutting tools. Anything below this limit is considered micro-ma-
chining and must be avoided unless necessary.

Maximum part size

CNC milling: 400 x 250 x 150 mm (typically)
CNC turning: Ø 500 mm  1000 mm (typically)
Very large CNC machines can produce parts with dimensions up to 2000
 800 x 1000 mm ( 78''  32''  40''). 5-ais CNC machining systems typi-
cally have a smaller build volume.

Tolerances

Standard: ± 0.125 mm (.005'')
Feasible: ± 0.025 mm (.001'')
Tolerances (unilateral, bilateral, interference or geometric) should be de-
ned on all critical features, but do not over-tolerance.

  If no tolerance is specied in the technical drawing, then the standard
± 0.125 mm will be held.

                                                                                                  21
Designing undercuts

Undercuts are features that can't be machined with standard tools, no
matter how the part is rotated, because the cutting tools can't access all
the surfaces.

  If square aluminum etrusions were manufactured with CNC machining,
their grooves would be considered undercuts. Undercuts can be machined
using special T-shaped, V-shaped or lollipop-shaped cutting tools, if de-
signed correctly.

  Here are some practical guidelines to help you get started with design-
ing undercuts.
Learn more about undercuts 

                                                          Undercut dimensions

                                                                       Recommended width: 3 mm (1/8'') to 40 mm (1 ½'')
                                                                       Ma. Depth: 2 width
                                                                       Design undercuts with a width of whole millimeter increments or a stan-
                                                                       dard inch fraction. For undercuts with non-standard dimensions, a custom
                                                                       cutting tool must be created.

                                                                          The standard tools have a cutting depth of approimately 2 times their
                                                                       width. This limits the achievable depth.

                                                          Undercut clearance

                                                                       Recommended min. clearance: 4 depth
                                                                       For undercuts on internal faces, add enough clearance between the op-
                                                                       posing walls to ensure tool access.

22
Part 3

Materials for CNC
machining

CNC machining can be used with a very wide range of engineering
metals and plastics.

  In this section, you'll learn more about the key characteristics of the
most popular materials. We'll also eamine the most common nishes
that are applied to CNC machined parts.

23                                                                         23
Materials for CNC machining

Selecting the right material is a crucial step in the design process. The
optimal material option is highly dependent on your specic use case and
requirements.

  Since almost every material with sucient hardness can be machined,
CNC oers a very large range of material options to choose from. For
engineering applications, metals and plastics are most relevant and will be
the focus of this section. Surface nishes can also alter the properties of
CNC machined parts which we'll eamine them below.

  To get started, take a look at this decision tree. It contains high lev-
el material recommendations that cover the most common design
requirements.

                                                  Material Property

Tensile strength              Hardness              High volumes                   Chemical             Temperature
                                                  Easy to machine                resistance             resistance

                  < 90 HRB              > 50 R C       Aluminium             Stainless Steel
                                                           Brass                       PEEK
                                                            POM
                                                                                     Teflon

                  Stainless Steel  Tool Steel
                     Alloy Steel

                                                                                Lo w          Medium      High
                                                                             < 250º C         < 400º C  > 500º C

        Lo w       Medium              High                                  Brass     Aluminium        Stainless Steel
    < 100 MP a    < 500 MP a       > 500 MP a                                 PEEK                          Tool Steel
                                                                             Teflon                        Alloy Steel
       PEEK
      Nylon       Aluminium   Stainless Steel
                                  Tool Steel
        PC                       Alloy Steel

24
Metals

  CNC machining is primarily used with metals and metal alloys. Metal
can be used for both the manufacturing of custom one-o parts and
prototypes and for low-to-medium batch production. Aluminum 6061 is by
far the most used material in CNC machining.

Learn more about the most common CNC metals 

                                Aluminum

                                > Ecellent strength-to-weight ratio
                                > High thermal and electrical conductivity
                                > Natural protection against corrosion

                                Stainless steel

                                > High strength and ductility
                                > Ecellent wear and corrosion resistance
                                > Can be welded, machined and polished

                                Alloy steel

                                > General use alloys
                                > Improved hardness, toughness, fatigue and wear resistance over mild steels
                                > Low chemical resistance

                                Mild steel

                                > General use alloys
                                > Low-cost
                                > Good mechanical properties, machinability and weldability

                                Tool steel

                                > High hrdness
                                > Stiness, brsion nd therml resistnce
                                > Used for dies, stmps, molds nd other industril tooling

                                Brass

                                > Ecellent machinability
                                > Frictional characteristics
                                > Aesthetically pleasing golden appearance

                                                                                                                                                                          25
Plastics

  Plastics are lightweight materials with a wide range of physical
properties. They're often used for their chemical resistance and electrical
insulation properties. Plastics are commonly CNC machined for
prototyping purposes prior to injection molding.
Learn more about the most common CNC plastics 

                                ABS
                                   Common, lightweight thermoplastic materials
                                   with good mechanical properties and ecellent
                                   impact strength.

                                Polycarbonate (PC)
                                   Ecellent impact strength, thermal resistance
                                   and toughness. Can be colored or transparent.
                                   Suitable for outdoor applications.

                                Nylon
                                   General purpose engineering thermoplastic with
                                   all-around good mechanical properties and e-
                                   cellent chemical resistance.

                                POM (Delrin)
                                   Easiest-to-machine engineering thermoplastic
                                   with high stiness, ecellent frictional charac-
                                   teristics and good thermal stability.

                                PEEK

                                   High-performance engineering thermoplastic
                                   used in the most demanding applications.
26
Surface nishes

Surface nishes are applied after machining and can change the
appearance, surface roughness, hardness and chemical resistance of the
produced parts. Below is a quick summary of the most common nishes
for CNC.

Find out more about surface nishes 

                                             Powder coating

                                             Powder coating adds a thin layer of strong, wear and corrosion resistant,
                                             protective polymer paint on the surface of a part. It can be applied to
                                             parts of any material and is available in many colors.

                                                                       Etra cost: $$  Cons

Pros                                                                                  · Can't be applied to internal surfaces
· Strong, wear and corrosion coating for functional applications                      · Less dimensional control compared to anodizing
· Higher impact resistance than anodizing                                             · Not suitable for small components
· Compatible with all metal materials

                                             As-machined

Pros                                         As-machined parts have the tightest tolerances, as no etra operations are
                                             performed on them. But marks following the path of the cutting tool are
· Tightest dimensional tolerances            still visible.
· No added cost (standard nish)
                                               The standard surface roughness of as-machined parts is 3.2 m (125 in)
                                             and can be reduced to down to 0.4 m (16 in) with further operations.

                                             Etra cost: None

                                                                         Cons
                                                                         · Visible tool marks

                                             Bead blasting

                                             Bead blasting adds a uniform matt or satin surface nish on a machined
                                             part, removing all tool marks.

                                               Bead blasting is mainly used for aesthetic purposes, as the resulting sur-
                                             face roughness is not guaranteed. Critical surfaces or features (like holes)
                                             can be masked to avoid any dimensional change.

                                             Etra cost: $

Pros                                                                                  Cons
                                                                                      · Visible tool marks
· Visually pleasing matte or satin nish
· Low-cost surface nish
· Available in dierent levels of coarseness

                                                                                                                                        27
                                            Anodizing (clear or colored)

                                            Anodizing adds a thin, hard, non-conductive ceramic coating on the sur-
                                            face of aluminum parts, increasing their corrosion and wear resistance.

                                              Critical areas can be masked to retain their tight tolerances. Anodized
                                            parts can be dyed producing a smooth aesthetically pleasing surface.

                                            Etra cost: $$

Pros                                                                 Cons

· Durable, visually pleasing coating                                 · More brittle than powder coating
· Can be applied to internal cavities                                · Only compatible with aluminum and titanium
· Can be colored to any Pantone tone

                                            Hardcoat anodizing

                                            Hardcoat anodizing produces a thicker, high-density ceramic coating that
                                            provides ecellent corrosion and wear resistance.

                                              Hardcoat anodizing is suitable for functional applications. The typical
                                            coating thickness is 50 m and, usually, no color is applied. Critical areas
                                            can be masked to retain their tight tolerances.

                                            Etra cost: $$$

Pros                                                                 Cons

· High wear resistance coating for top-end engineering applications  · More brittle than powder coating
· Can be applied to internal cavities                                · Only compatible with aluminum and titanium
· Good dimensional control

                                            Silk screening

                                            Silk screening is an inepensive way to print tet or logos on the surface of
                                            CNC machined parts for aesthetic purposes.

                                              It can be used in addition to other nishes (for eample, anodizing). The
                                            print can be applied only to the eternal surfaces of a part.

                                            Etra cost: $

Pros                                                                 Cons
                                                                     · Can be only applied to eternal at surfaces of a part
· Low-cost printing of custom tet or logos
· Available in many colors

28
Part 4

Cost reduction tips

Learn more about what aects the costs in CNC machining. Use these
3 actionable design tips to cut the price in half and you keep your
project on budget.

29                                                                   29
Tips to keep your CNC project
on budget

The cost of CNC machined parts depends on the following:
> Machining time and model complexity: The more comple the geome-
try of a part is, the longer it takes to machine and the more epensive it will
be.
> Start-up costs: These are related to the preparation of a CAD le and the
process. They are signicant for smaller volumes, but are ed. There is an
opportunity to reduce the unit price by taking advantage of economies of
scale.
> Material cost and nishes: The cost of the bulk material and how easily
that material can be machined greatly aects the overall cost.
As a rule of thumb:
To minimize the cost of CNC machined parts, stick to de-
signs with simple geometries and standardized features.
In the net sections, we re-eamine some of the design rules we visited
previously with cost-reduction in mind. With these 3 design tips, you can
drastically reduce the cost of your CNC machined parts.
Learn 11 more tips to further reduce the cost of your CNC parts 

30
Tip #1: Increase the size of all llets
or add undercuts to sharp edges

To reduce machining times, add a llet that is as large as
possible to all internal (and eternal) vertical edges. This way a
larger tool can be used, removing more material with each cut,
and a circular toolpath can be followed, cutting each corner at
a higher speed.

  When a 90° internal edge is needed, reducing the radius will
not do the job. In these cases, use an undercut instead (see
above).
To minimize cost:
> Add a radius that is slightly larger than 1/3 of the depth of the
cavity
> Add a small llet also to eternal edges
> Use undercuts when a 90° internal corner is required
> Use the same radius for all edges to save time on tool
changes

                                                                                                                                                                           31
Tip #2: Minimize the number of
machine orientations

The part above requires at least two machine setups in a 3-ais
CNC mill. After the features on one side are machined, the
workpiece is rotated manually.

  This requires manual labor increasing costs. Alternatively, a
multi-ais CNC machines can be used. This also increases the
machining costs though by about 60% to 100%.
To minimize cost:
> Design parts that can be machined in one or two setups in a
3-ais CNC mill
> If this is not possible, consider splitting the part into multiple
geometries that can be machined in one setup and assembled
later.

32
Tip #3: Consider the cost of
the material

Cost  Metals                                                     Cost  Plastics

$     Aluminum 6061                                              $     POM (Delrin)
$$    Alloy steel 4140                                           $$$   ABS
$$    Aluminum 7075                                              $$$   Nylon (PA 6)
$$$   Brass C360                                                 $$$   Polycarbonate (PC)
$$$$  Stainless steel 304                                        $$$$  PEEK

It's obvious that selecting a material with physical properties
that surpass the requirements of your application can quickly
and unnecessarily increase the cost of your CNC machined
parts.

To minimize cost:

> Select the material with the lowest cost with the properties
that fulll your design requirements

> Use online instant quoting to get quick feedback on the price
of each material

      The essential CNC cost reduction checklist

      Get a free PDF checklist to show you how to
      optimize your design and cut CNC machining
      costs in half.
      Download now 

                                                                                           33
Part 5

Start CNC machining

With your parts designed and optimized for CNC machining, it's time
to start thinking about manufacturing. In this section, we walk you
through the 3 simple steps needed to manufacture custom parts with
CNC machining.

34
Step 1: Export your design to a
CNC-compatible CAD le format

The le formats predominantly used in CNC machining are STEP and
IGES. These formats are open source, standardized and can be used
across platforms.
For best results:
Export your designs directly from your native CAD software
into the STEP fle ormat.
On 3D Hubs, you can also upload les and get an instant quote for le
formats used in your the native CAD software, including SLDPRT, 3DM,
IPT, SAT and X_T.

                                                                                                                                                                          35
Step 2: Prepare a technical drawing

A technical drawing isn't always required for machining parts
with CNC. Yet it's recommended to include one in your order
as it has information that is not presented in a STEP le.
A technical drawing is required in the following situations:
> When your design contain threads
> When any tolerances are specied
> When certain surfaces need a dierent nish
Learn how to correctly prepare a technical drawing for CNC 
36
Step 3: Get an instant quote and
start manufacturing

With 3D Hubs, outsourcing parts for CNC machining is easy, fast and
highly price-competitive.

  By combining a network of manufacturing services with our smart
sourcing engine, you can instantly access readily available production
capacity for the best possible quotes and lead times.

  When you upload your parts to 3D Hubs, our automated Design for
Machinability analysis will detect any potential design issues before pro-
duction begins and will give you an instant quote, based on our machine
learning algorithm.

  This way you can be sure that you always receive the best price in the
market at the fastest turnaround times for your CNC machining parts!

                                Upload your parts
                                   Curious about the cost of CNC machining?
                                   Receive an instant quote for your CNC machined
                                   parts now.
                                   Get an instant quote 

                                                                                                                                                                          37
Part 6

Useful resources

In this guide we discussed everything you need to get started with
CNC machining. But there's plenty more to learn.

  On the net page, we list the best and most useful resources on
CNC machining and other digital manufacturing technologies if you
want to delve deeper.

38
Knowledge base

There's a lot more to learn about CNC machining in our Knowledge Base
- a collection of technical articles on all manufacturing technologies, writ-
ten by manufacturing eperts and curated by 3D Hubs.
Here's a selection of our most popular articles on CNC machining:

> Reducing the cost of CNC machined parts 
> 3D Printing vs. CNC machining 
> 25 CNC machining materials compared 
> How to design parts for CNC machining 

Learn to machine

Are you looking to get your hands dirty with CNC machining? There are
several ways you can learn how to operate a CNC mill or CNC lathe.

> Visit your local Fab Lab: Many Fablabs and Makerspaces have CNC
milling capabilities and they will run courses on how to opperate them.
Visit the ocial list of Fab Labs to nd one near your area.

> Find resources online: There are a lot of useful resources online to help
you hone your CNC machining skills. The Titans of CNC Academy and
NYCCNC are probably 2 of the best sites to get you started.

> Apply for an apprenticeship: Apprenticeships are probably the best
way to kickstart your career as a CNC machinist. They are oered by
established machine shops and many universities.

Other guides

Want to learn more about the world of digital manufacturing as a whole?
There are more technologies to eplore:

                                Injection molding:
                                The complete engineering guide

                                        After reading this article, you'll know the fundamental
                                        mechanics of the injection molding process and how
                                        these relate to its key benets and limitations.

                                What is 3D printing?

                                        Find everything you need to know about 3D printing.
                                        Whether you are getting started or you're an eperi-
                                        enced user, you'll nd this guide packed with useful
                                        tips.

                                                                                                                                                                          39
