Getting Started with
Mastercam Solids

July 2014
TERMS OF USE     Mastercam® X8 Solids Getting Started

                 Date: July 2014
                 Copyright © 2014 CNC Software, Inc.-- All rights reserved.
                 Software: Mastercam X8

                 Use of this document is subject to the Mastercam End User License Agreement. A
                 copy of the Mastercam End User License Agreement is included with the
                 Mastercam product package of which this document is part. The Mastercam End
                 User License Agreement can also be found at:
                 http://www.mastercam.com/companyinfo/legal/LicenseAgreement.aspx

Be sure you      Information might have been changed or added since this document was
have the latest  published. The latest version of this document is installed with Mastercam or can
information!
                 be obtained from your local Reseller. A ReadMe file (ReadMe.pdf)--installed
                 with each release--includes the latest information about Mastercam features and
                 enhancements.
                                                                                                                                                           i

Contents

Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1

      Tutorial Goals................................................................................................. 1
         General Tutorial Requirements....................................................................... 1

 1. Introduction to Mastercam Solids ........................................ 3

      Getting Ready to Work................................................................................. 3
      Exercise 1: Creating the Tray Base ....................................................... 4
      Exercise 2: Creating the Upper Bosses ................................................. 8
      Exercise 3: Creating the Finger Cutouts .............................................. 11
      Exercise 4: Creating the Marker Cutouts............................................. 14
      Exercise 5: Adding the Handle ............................................................ 15
      Exercise 6: Adding Draft and Fillets .................................................... 20

         Adding Draft ................................................................................................. 20
         Adding Outside Fillets .................................................................................. 22
         Adding Top Fillets ........................................................................................ 23
      Exercise 7: Shelling the Part ............................................................... 24
      Other Solids Functions ............................................................................... 26
      Exercise 8: Using Solids Revolve ........................................................ 26
      Exercise 9: Creating Solids with Sweep.............................................. 28
      Exercise 10: Using Boolean to Create a Hole ...................................... 29
      Exercise 11: Adding Chamfers ............................................................ 31
      Challenge ..................................................................................................... 32

 2. Introduction to Model Prep................................................. 37

      Getting Ready to Work............................................................................... 37
      The Scenario................................................................................................ 37
      Exercise 1: Splitting the Feet from the Part......................................... 38
ii MASTERCAM X8

      Exercise 2: Removing One Foot........................................................... 43
      Exercise 3: Reducing the Foot Height.................................................. 45
      Exercise 4: Repositioning the Feet ...................................................... 47
      Exercise 5: Resizing the Foot Holes..................................................... 51
      Exercise 6: Creating the Counterbore .................................................. 53
      Exercise 7: Aligning the Vertical Wall.................................................. 57
      Exercise 8: Expanding the Wall Opening ............................................. 60
      Exercise 9: Increasing the Wall Height................................................ 62
      Exercise 10: Adding the Fillet.............................................................. 64
      Challenge ..................................................................................................... 66

 Conclusion......................................................................................................... 69

      Mastercam Resources ............................................................................... 70
      Mastercam Documentation ....................................................................... 70

         Contact Us.................................................................................................... 71
Introduction

Mastercam Solids features functions for creating and editing solid models, with
support for both history-based and "brick" solids (no history tree). When you create a
solid model in Mastercam, all operations appear in the solids history tree, where you
can edit the solid model in many ways.

Mastercam's Model Prep functions, let you modify solid models lacking a history tree.
Mastercam can identify individual geometry elements and even entire features. Using
Model Prep functions such as Push-Pull, Move, and Split Solid Face, you can make
changes to a solid, despite having no access to the model's original wireframe.

Tutorial Goals

       Create a solid model from wireframe geometry.
       Edit a solid model from the solid history tree.
       Modify "brick" solid models with Mastercam's Model Prep functions.

         IMPORTANT: Screen colors in the tutorial pictures were modified to
         enhance image quality; they may not match your Mastercam settings or
         the tutorial results. These color differences do not affect the lesson or
         the exercise results.

General Tutorial Requirements

All Mastercam tutorials have the following general requirements:
       You must be comfortable using the Windows® operating system.
2 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction

       Each lesson in the tutorial builds on the mastery of preceding lesson's skills.
           We recommend that you complete them in order.

       Additional files may accompany a tutorial. Unless the tutorial provides specific
           instructions on where to place these files, store them in a folder that can be
           accessed from the Mastercam workstation, either with the tutorial or in any
           location that you prefer.

       You will need an internet connection to view videos that are referenced in the
           tutorials. All videos can be found on our YouTube channel:
           www.youtube.com/user/MastercamTechDocs.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
LESSON 1

Introduction to Mastercam Solids

1

Mastercam Solids features the tools you need to create sophisticated solid models,
using functions with dynamic preview so you can see results as soon you edit parame-
ters. The solids history tree lists the operations that generate the solid, and you can
open and edit any operation, as well as move, delete, and suppress operations.

Getting Ready to Work

This tutorial includes the files needed to complete the exercises. You can find these
files in the tutorial's Parts folder, which itself contains the subfolders FlangeDemo,
MarkerTray, PressurePlate, ShippingPullTab, and SpindlePartial. Place these
files on your system wherever convenient, but be sure to keep an unmodified set. In
preparation for the following exercises, set up Mastercam as described here.

       1 Start Mastercam using your
           preferred method:
           Double-click Mastercam's
               desktop icon.
               Or
           Launch Mastercam from the
               Windows Start menu.

       2 Select the default metric configuration file:
           a Select Settings, Configuration
               from Mastercam's menu.

           b Choose ...\mcamxm.config <Metric> from the Current drop-down list.

           c Click OK.
4 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

In this lesson, you work on the file named MarkerTray, which is included with this
tutorial. In most cases, this is the only file you will need to complete the lesson.
However, a set of files named MarkerTray01 through MarkerTray07 are also included
with this tutorial and are the results of each of the exercises. For example,
MarkerTray01 is the results of Exercise 1 and so is the state the part should be in when
starting Exercise 2.

Exercise 1: Creating the Tray Base

       1 Open the file MarkerTray.
           The following picture shows the file loaded into Mastercam.

       2 So you do not overwrite the original, save the file as MarkerTray-XXX, where
           XXX is your intitials.

       3 From Mastercam's menu, choose
           Solids, Extrude.
           The Chaining dialog box opens.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                       CREATING THE TRAY BASE 5

4 Chain the outer rectangle, as shown
    in the picture to the right.

5 Click OK in the Chaining dialog box.

    Mastercam performs an extrusion on the selected chain and displays the Solid
    Extrude function panel.

6 In the function panel, click the
    Reverse All button.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
6 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

           Mastercam reverses the extrude
           direction.

       7 Set the extrude distance to 2mm,
           and press [Tab] to accept the new
           setting.

           Mastercam shows a preview of the
           new extrusion, as shown in the
           picture to the right.

       8 Click OK and Create New
           Operation to finalize the extrude
           operation and begin a new one.

       9 Chain the inside rectangle, and click
           OK in the Chaining dialog box.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                   CREATING THE TRAY BASE 7

10 Reverse the extrude direction, and
      set the distance to 5mm.

Your part should now look like the picture below.

11 Set the solids operation to Add
      boss.
      The Add boss option creates the
      extrusion as new material on the
      part.

12 Click the Advanced tab, and turn on
      Draft, leaving the angle at 5 degrees

                                                                         GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
8 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

           Mastercam updates the display to
           show the draft on the extrusion.

         TIP: If you have difficulty seeing the
         draft on the part, toggle the Draft
         option several times, watching how
         the part's geometry changes.

     13 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize the extrude operations.

     14 Save the file as MarkerTray01-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 2: Creating the Upper Bosses

Now that you have the tray's base, you can add the bosses that form the eraser holder
and the marker storage area. For this exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or
load MarkerTray01, which accompanies this tutorial. If you choose to start with
MarkerTray01, remember to save it under the new name MarkerTray01-XXX, where
XXX is your initials.

       1 In Mastercam's status bar, click
           Level.
           The Level Manager opens.

       2 Turn on level 2, by clicking in its
           Visible column, and then click OK in
           the Level Manager dialog box.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                          CREATING THE UPPER BOSSES 9

    The part displays new geometry, as
    shown in the picture to the right.
    This geometry was previously
    created for you and provides the
    basis of the new bosses.

3 In Mastercam's menu bar, choose
    Solids, Extrude.
    The Chaining dialog box opens.

4 Chain the two new rectangles, and
    click OK in the Chaining dialog box.

Mastercam creates the two new
extrusions.

                               GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
10 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       5 Click the blue arrow, and then hover
           your mouse over the ruler that
           appears.
           The ruler lets you enter linear values
           visually. If you prefer, you can also
           type values.

       6 Using your mouse wheel, zoom in
           closer to the ruler.
           Mastercam displays smaller
           increments on the ruler.

       7 Move your mouse up over the ruler
           until it snaps to 25mm, and then
           click to set the new distance.

         TIP: When you move your mouse
         over the ruler, the selected value
         snaps to the ruler's increments.
         When you move the mouse outside
         the ruler, no snapping is in effect.
       8 In the function panel, select Add

           boss.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                            CREATING THE FINGER CUTOUTS 11

9 Click the Advanced tab, and notice
    that the draft angle is still set to 5
    degrees.

    Mastercam remembers your solids
    settings for the current session.

     10 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize the extrude operations.

     11 Save the file as MarkerTray02-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 3: Creating the Finger Cutouts

Next, you create finger cutouts in the new extrusions. These cutouts make it easier for
the tray's user to get his fingers under the eraser or the markers. For this exercise,
continue with the part you just saved, or load MarkerTray02, which accompanies this
tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new
name MarkerTray02-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 In Mastercam's status bar, click
           Level, and then in the Level
           Manager, turn on level 4.

2 In Mastercam's toolbar, click
    Shading Translucency Toggle.

                                            GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
12 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

           The part becomes partially
           transparent, allowing you to see the
           two new rectangles hidden under
           existing geometry.

       3 In Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Solids, Extrude.

       4 Chain the two new rectangles,
           clicking OK in the Chaining dialog
           box when finished.

           Mastercam extrudes the two
           chained rectangles, as shown in the
           picture to the right.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                         CREATING THE FINGER CUTOUTS 13

5 In the function panel, change the
    operation to Cut body, and select
    Through all.

    The Cut body option is the opposite
    of Add boss, removing material from
    the part rather than adding it.

6 On the Advanced tab, turn off Draft.

7 Turn off translucency by clicking
    Shading Translucency Toggle.

    Now you can see the effect of the
    two new cuts more easily.

8 In the function panel, click OK to
    finalize the extrude operation.

9 Save the file as MarkerTray03-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
14 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

Exercise 4: Creating the Marker Cutouts

Now you create the cutouts for each individual marker. For this exercise, continue with
the part you just saved, or load MarkerTray03, which accompanies this tutorial. If you
choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name
MarkerTray03-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 In Mastercam's status bar, click
           Level, and then in the Level
           Manager, turn on level 3, and click
           OK.

           Mastercam displays the geometry
           created for you on that level. This
           geometry represents the shape of
           the marker cutouts.

       2 In Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Solids, Extrude.

       3 Chain the new geometry, clicking
           OK in the Chaining dialog box when
           finished.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                        ADDING THE HANDLE 15

4 In the function panel, select Cut
    body.

5 In the Distance section, select
    Through all and Both directions.

    Mastercam cuts the shape specified
    by the chained geometry through
    both sides of the boss, giving the
    results shown.

       6 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize the extrude operation.

       7 Save the file as MarkerTray04-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 5: Adding the Handle

Because Mastercam Solids maintains a history tree of all operations used to create a
solid model, you can easily edit the model, to correct errors or add new features. To
demonstrate this, you now add a handle to the marker tray using the solids tree. For
this exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or load MarkerTray04, which
accompanies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save
it under the new name MarkerTray04-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
16 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       1 In Mastercam's status bar, click
           Level, and then in the Level
           Manager, turn on level 5, and turn
           off levels 2, 3, and 4.

           Mastercam displays the geometry
           that you need to create the handle.

       2 In Mastercam's right-hand toolbar,
           choose the wireframe quick mask.
           Mastercam selects all wireframe
           geometry.

       3 Press [Alt+E] to hide all geometry
           except the selected wireframe.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                           ADDING THE HANDLE 17

4 In Mastercam's toolbar, select Trim /
    Break / Extend.

5 Select the Divide option in the trim
    ribbon bar.

6 Click the line indicated in the picture
    to the right.

    Mastercam trims the line, leaving the
    handle merged with the main part of
    the tray.

7 At the bottom of the Toolpaths
    Manager, click the Solids tab.
    Mastercam displays the solids
    operation tree.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
18 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       8 Click the plus sign (+) next to the
           item in the tree.
           Mastercam opens the list to show
           the operations you created to
           generate the solid.

       9 Notice that the first extrude
           operation is marked dirty.
           By adding the handle, you changed
           the geometry that makes up the
           tray's base, which means that the
           extrude operation must be
           regenerated.

     10 Press [Alt+E] to turn the full
           geometry back on, and then click
           Regen all to regenerate the solids
           operations.

           The handle is now a full part of the
           tray's base.

     11 Double-click the first extrude in the
           tree to reopen the operation.
           Mastercam opens the Solid Extrude
           function panel so you can make
           changes to the operation.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                            ADDING THE HANDLE 19

12 In the function panel, click the Add
      Chains button.
      Mastercam opens the Chaining
      dialog box.

13 Chain the inside of the handle, and
      click OK.

      Mastercam adds the chain to the
      extrude operation, cutting the
      handle opening.

14 If the chaining arrow is not pointing
      down, right-click Chain 2, and click
      Reverse.

                                         GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
20 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

     15 Click OK and Regenerate to both
           finalize and regenerate the
           operation.
           OK and Regenerate saves you from
           going to the solids tree to
           regenerate.

     16 Save the file as MarkerTray05-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 6: Adding Draft and Fillets

In this exercise, you add draft to a face and fillets to some edges. Continue with the
part you just saved, or load MarkerTray05, which accompanies this tutorial. If you
choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name
MarkerTray05-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

 Adding Draft

       1 In Level Manager, turn off all levels
           but 10.

       2 Choose Solids, Draft, Draft to Face.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                           ADDING DRAFT AND FILLETS 21

3 Select the face indicated in the
    picture to the right, and click OK in
    the Solid Selection dialog box.

4 Select the top face of the same wall
    (as indicated in the picture) as the
    reference face.
    Mastercam creates the draft relative
    to the reference face.

5 Change the draft angle to 10mm.

6 Click OK to accept the changes.

                                           GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
22 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

 Adding Outside Fillets

       1 Choose Solids, Fillet, Constant Radius Fillet.

       2 Turn off all filters except edges.

       3 Select all 4 of the tray's left outside vertical edges.

       4 Click OK in the Solid Selection
           dialog box, and then set the fillet
           radius to 5mm.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                            ADDING DRAFT AND FILLETS 23

5 Select OK and Create New
    Operation.

 Adding Top Fillets

      1 Turn the face selection filter back on, select the faces shown below, and click
           OK in the Solid Selection dialog box.

Notice the yellow warning that appears in the upper-right corner of the
graphics area. This indicates that there is a problem with your current settings.

                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
24 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       2 Click the warning to open the entire
           message.
           This warning displayed because the
           fillet's radius is too large.

       3 Reduce the fillet's radius to 1mm.
           The warning closes, and you get the result shown in the following picture.

       4 Click OK to finalize the operation.

       5 Save the file as MarkerTray06-XXX, where XXX is your initials.
         NOTE: The marker tray part has many other edges that should be filleted.
         However, to avoid a lot of repetition, this tutorial leaves those steps out.

Exercise 7: Shelling the Part

To complete the part, you will now use Shell to remove extra interior material. For this
exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or load MarkerTray06, which accom-
panies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it
under the new name MarkerTray06-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                      SHELLING THE PART 25

1 Rotate the view so you can see the
    bottom of the part.

2 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
    Solids, Shell.
    The Solid Selection dialog box
    opens.

3 Select the part's bottom face, and click OK in the Solid Selection dialog box.

TIP: If you have trouble selecting the part's bottom face,
turn off all filters in the Solid Selection dialog box, except
the one for faces.

                                                                   GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
26 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       4 Change the shell thickness for Direction 1 to 3mm.
       5 Click OK to finalize the operation.
       6 Save the file as MarkerTray07-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

           This completes the MarkerTray part.

Other Solids Functions

In this section, you try other Mastercam Solids functions, including Revolve, Sweep,
and Boolean.

Exercise 8: Using Solids Revolve

       1 Open the file SpindlePartial, which is included with this tutorial.
           After loading the part, Mastercam looks like the following picture.

       2 So you do not overwrite the original, save the file as SpindlePartial-XXX,
           where XXX is your initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                          USING SOLIDS REVOLVE 27

3 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
    Solids, Revolve.
    The Chaining dialog box opens.

4 Chain the geometry as shown, and
    click OK in the Chaining dialog box.
    You will revolve this geometry to
    create the main part.

5 Click the line indicated. This line is
    your axis of rotation.

Mastercam revolves the geometry
around the line you clicked.

                                          GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
28 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       6 Click OK to finalize the operation.
       7 Save the file as SpindlePartial01-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 9: Creating Solids with Sweep

       1 Rotate the view so you can see the
           circle indicated.

       2 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Solids, Sweep.

       3 Chain the circle, and click OK in the
           Chaining dialog box.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                            USING BOOLEAN TO CREATE A HOLE 29

4 Chain the line indicated in the
    picture to the right. This line is the
    sweep's along curve.

Mastercam sweeps the circle along
the line forming the new solid
shown in the picture to the right.

      5 Click OK to finalize the operation.
      6 Save the file as SpindlePartial02-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 10: Using Boolean to Create a Hole

      1 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Solids, Boolean.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
30 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       2 Click the main body of the part. This
           is the Boolean function's target
           body.
           The Solid Selection dialog box
           opens.

       3 Click the solid body you just created,
           and click OK in the Solid Selection
           dialog box.
           Mastercam sets the selected feature
           as the tool body, and the Boolean
           function panel opens.

       4 Change the operation type to
           Remove.
           Mastercam removes all material
           from the selected area.

       5 Click OK to finalize the operation.

       6 Save the file as SpindlePartial03-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                       ADDING CHAMFERS 31

Exercise 11: Adding Chamfers

      1 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose Solids, Chamfer, One-Distance
           Chamfer.

      2 In the Solid Selection dialog box,
           turn off all filters except edges.
           Choosing the right filter makes
           selection easier.

      3 Select the edge indicated in the
           picture to the right, and then click
           OK in the Solid Selection dialog box.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
32 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       4 Change the chamfer's distance to
           5mm., and press [Tab].

           Mastercam creates the specified
           chamfer.

       5 Click OK to finalize the operation.
       6 Save the file as SpindlePartial04-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

           You have now completed the spindle part.

Challenge

In this section, you test your Solids knowledge and skills by applying Solids functions
to supplied geometry to create a pressure plate part. If you have trouble with any step,
refer to the page indicated in that step. The following pictures show two views of the
part you will create.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                         CHALLENGE 33

  NOTE: In most steps, the left picture is a "before" screen shot and the
  right is an "after."
1 Load the file PressurePlate, included with this tutorial.

    After loading the part, Mastercam should look like the following picture.

2 So you do not overwrite the original, save the file as PressurePlate-XXX,
    where XXX is your initials.

3 Extrude the outside rectangle and the six large circles downward by 15mm.
    (For help, refer to page 4.)

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
34 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       4 Extrude the inner rectangle upward by 10mm. (For help, refer to page 8.)

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Steps 3 and 4.
       5 Use Solids Shell to cut out the center rectangle to a thickness of 10mm. (For

          help, refer to page 24.) Hint: Make sure to select only the face.

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 5.
       6 Use Solids Boolean to join all features into a single solid. (For help, refer to

           page 30.)

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                         CHALLENGE 35

  VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 6.
7 Use Solids Extrude to create holes from the six smaller circles. (For help, refer

    to page 11.)

  VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 7.
8 Add a 3mm fillet to the part's bottom face. (For help, refer to page 20.)

  VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 8.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
36 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Mastercam Solids

       9 Add 3mm fillets to the inner corners. (For help, refer to page 20.)

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 9.
     10 Use the solids tree to change the 3mm bottom fillet to 2mm and to add 2mm

           fillets to the 12 vertical edges of each rounded tab. (For help, refer to
           page 15.)

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 10.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
LESSON 2

Introduction to Model Prep

2

Model Prep provides functions, such as Push-Pull, Move, and Split Solid Faces, that let
you edit solids without a history tree. When you use Model Prep functions, Mastercam
recognizes edges, faces, and even complete features, giving you the power to make
changes without the operations or wireframe used to create the solid.

Getting Ready to Work

In this lesson, you work on the file named FlangeDemo, which is included with this
tutorial. This is the only file you need to complete the lesson. However, a set of files
named FlangeDemo01 through FlangeDemo10 are also included with this tutorial and
are the results of each of the exercises. For example, FlangeDemo01 is the results of
Exercise 1 and so can be used when starting Exercise 2. If you have problems with an
exercise, you can load the appropriate file and continue with the tutorial.

The Scenario

This lesson is based on the part file shown in the following picture.

In the scenario, you have a part file that requires changes based on new specifications.
The required changes are as follows:
38 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       Remove one of the feet.
       Reduce the foot height by 5mm.
       Reposition the three remaining feet to be 120 degrees apart.
       Increase the foot hole diameter to 12mm.
       Reduce the part's center hole diameter to 20mm and add a 30mm

           counterbore, 2mm deep.
       Align the opening on the vertical wall with one of the feet.
       Increase the opening width from 20 degrees to 45 degrees.
       Increase the vertical wall height from 35mm to 50mm.
       Add a 10mm fillet to the vertical wall's inside bottom edge.

Exercise 1: Splitting the Feet from the Part

To manipulate the part's feet as needed for the edits, you must first separate them
from the rest of the part.

       1 Load the file FlangeDemo.
           The part should look like the picture
           to the right.

       2 Save the file as FlangeDemo-XXX,
           where XXX is your initials.
           Saving the file under a new name
           ensures that you do not accidentally
           overwrite the original.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                     SPLITTING THE FEET FROM THE PART 39

3 In Mastercam's toolbar, click Top
    (WCS).

Mastercam displays the part in the
top view.

4 In Mastercam's toolbar, choose
    Create Circle Center Point.

5 Draw a circle centered on the part,
    with a diameter (100mm) that
    matches the outmost circular edge
    of the part.
    You will use this circle as helper
    geometry to separate the feet from
    the main body of the part.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
40 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       6 From Mastercam's menu, choose
           Model Prep, Split Solid Face.
           This function splits single faces into
           multiple faces that you can
           manipulate separately.

       7 In Mastercam's toolbar, choose
           Isometric (WCS).

           Mastercam displays the part in
           isometric view.

       8 Click the circle and one of the feet.
           The circle projects down onto the selected face, indicating where the face will
           be split.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                            SPLITTING THE FEET FROM THE PART 41

9 In the Split Solid Face function
    panel, make sure Wireframe is
    selected and Project using
    construction plane is not selected.

10 Click OK and Create New
      Operation to finalize your choices
      and begin a new Split Solid Face
      operation.

      Mastercam splits the top face of the
      feet from the rest of the part. (The
      arrows in the picture indicate the
      split on the front feet.)

11 Hold down your mouse wheel and
      move the mouse to flip the part
      similarly to the picture.

                                         GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
42 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

     12 Select the bottom of the part and
           the circle.

     13 In the Split Solid Face function
           panel, ensure Wireframe and
           Project using construction plane
           are selected.
           The circle projects onto the face
           based on the construction plane, so
           you can split the face from the
           bottom.

     14 Click OK to finalize the operation.

           Mastercam splits the face. The red
           arrow in the picture indicates the
           new split.

     15 Delete the circle, and save the file as FlangeDemo1-XXX, where XXX is your
           initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                    REMOVING ONE FOOT 43

Exercise 2: Removing One Foot

With the feet split from the rest of the part, you can remove one of them, leaving three
as required by the modification instructions. For this exercise, continue with the part
you just saved, or load FlangeDemo01, which accompanies this tutorial. If you choose
to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name FlangeDemo01-
XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 From Mastercam's menu, choose
           Model Prep, Push-Pull.
           The Push-Pull function extends
           bosses or produces cuts based on
           selected faces or features. You can
           also use Push-Pull to create fillets
           from edges or to remove fillets.

       2 Place the part into isometric view.

       3 Click the lower-left foot, as shown. v

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
44 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

           This is the foot you will remove from
           the part. Mastercam highlights the
           foot and places a red single-axis
           arrow control on its face.

       4 Click the red arrow, drag downward
           to remove the foot, and click again
           to set the change.

           Your part should look like the picture below.

       5 Click OK to finalize the operation.
       6 Save the file as FlangeDemo02-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                         REDUCING THE FOOT HEIGHT 45

Exercise 3: Reducing the Foot Height

Now that you have the required three feet, you reduce the thickness of the remaining
feet, and center them on the part's outside rim. For this exercise, continue with the part
you just saved, or load FlangeDemo02, which accompanies this tutorial. If you choose
to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name FlangeDemo02-
XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 From Mastercam's menu, choose
           Model Prep, Push-Pull.

       2 Click the top face of each foot, and
           press [Enter].

       3 Click the red arrow, and type -2.5.
           With the Push-Pull function, you can
           type values or, as in the previous
           exercise, drag the arrow with your
           mouse.

       4 Press [Enter] twice.
           Mastercam reduces the foot height
           by 2.5mm.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
46 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

         NOTE: The first time you press [Enter], Mastercam shows the result and
         gives you a chance to type another value. The second time, Mastercam
         accepts the entry, and closes the entry field.

       5 Click OK and Create New
           Operation to finalize your choices
           and begin a new Push-Pull
           operation.

       6 Rotate the view to show the bottom
           of the part, and select the bottom
           faces of the three feet.

       7 Click the red arrow, and type -2.5
           into the box that appears.

       8 Press [Enter] twice.
           Mastercam reduces the foot height
           by 2.5mm, leaving the feet centered
           on the rim, as you can see by
           rotating the part to view the edge.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                       REPOSITIONING THE FEET 47

9 Click OK to finalize the operation.

     10 Save the file as FlangeDemo03-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 4: Repositioning the Feet

The next step is to reposition the feet so they are equidistant from each other. For this
exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or load FlangeDemo03, which accom-
panies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it
under the new name FlangeDemo03-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 Place the part into top view.

2 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
    Model Prep, Move.
    The Move function moves (and
    sometimes resizes), rotates, or
    copies solid features or faces.

3 Use window selection to select all of
    the faces of the left-hand foot.

  TIP: Rotate the view and check that
  you did not miss any faces.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
48 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       4 Click the gnomon's button to
           change from geometry
           manipulation mode to gnomon
           manipulation mode.
           The gnomon's current location is the
           center of rotation for the Move
           command. The gnomon
           manipulation mode lets you specify
           a new center of rotation.

       5 Click the ball at the gnomon's origin,
           and place the gnomon at the center
           of the part.
           The part's center point is now the
           center of rotation.

       6 Click the gnomon's button again, to
           change from gnomon manipulation
           mode back to geometry
           manipulation mode.
           You can now use the gnomon as a
           tool for rotating the selected foot
           into a new position.

         TIP: The image shown on the gnomon's button indicates
         the gnomon's mode. In the picture to the right, the left icon
         shows geometry manipulation mode and the right icon
         shows gnomon manipulation mode.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                           REPOSITIONING THE FEET 49

7 On the gnomon, click the center
    segment of the blue control.

    This segment of the control activates
    2D rotation around the Z axis.

8 Move your mouse, rotating the gnomon 30 degrees counter-clockwise, and
    then click to accept the rotation.

    The selected foot rotates with the mouse movement, as shown in the picture
    below.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
50 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       9 In the Move function panel, click OK
           and Create New Operation to
           finalize your changes and begin a
           new Move operation.

     10 Window select the right-hand foot,
           as shown.
           This foot must be moved 30 degrees
           clockwise.

     11 Switch to gnomon manipulation
           mode, and move the gnomon to the
           center of the part.

     12 Switch back to geometry
           manipulation mode, and rotate the
           gnomon 30 degrees clockwise (-30
           degrees).
           Mastercam rotates the foot into its
           correct position.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                          RESIZING THE FOOT HOLES 51

13 In the function panel, click OK to
      finalize the rotation.

      Your part should now look like the
      picture to the right.

     14 Save the file as FlangeDemo04-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 5: Resizing the Foot Holes

Next, you resize the hole in each foot, increasing them from 10mm to 12mm. For this
exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or load FlangeDemo04, which accom-
panies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it
under the new name FlangeDemo04-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 Change the part's view to isometric.

2 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
    Model Prep, Push-Pull.

3 In Mastercam's toolbar, turn off the
    Select edge filter. Only Select face
    should be on.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
52 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

           You can now more easily select the
           holes without accidentally selecting
           the hole edges.
       4 As shown in the picture below, click all three foot holes to select them as
           geometry for the Push-Pull function.

       5 Click the red arrow to display the
           ruler control.

       6 Use your mouse wheel to zoom in
           on the part until the ruler shows
           finer increments.
           The closer you zoom, the smaller the
           ruler's increments.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                      CREATING THE COUNTERBORE 53

7 Move your mouse pointer over the
    ruler, and click when the hole's
    radius equals 6mm.

         TIP: When you move your mouse outside the ruler, you can select any
         value. When you move your mouse over the ruler, the displayed value
         snaps to the ruler increments.

       8 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize your change and end the
           function.
           The holes are now 12mm, as shown
           in the picture to the right.

       9 Save the file as FlangeDemo05-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 6: Creating the Counterbore

The specifications state that your part's center hole be reduced to 20mm. You must
also add a counterbore. You can use Model Prep to make these changes. For this exer-
cise, continue with the part you just saved, or load FlangeDemo05, which accompanies
this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the
new name FlangeDemo05-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Model Prep, Push-Pull.

                                      GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
54 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       2 Click the center hole to select it as
           geometry for the Push-Pull function.

       3 Click the red arrow, type 10, and
           press [Enter] twice.
           Mastercam changes the hole's
           diameter to 20mm.

       4 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize the change.

       5 In Top view, create a 30mm
           diameter circle at the center of the
           part.
           You will use this circle to split the
           part's inner face at the diameter
           needed for the counterbore.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                   CREATING THE COUNTERBORE 55

6 From Mastercam's menu, choose
    Model Prep, Split Solid Face.

7 Rotate the part's view until it looks
    similar to the picture.
    If the circle is laying completely on
    top of the solid, you would have to
    turn off the face filter in general
    selection to pick the circle. When the
    circle is positioned over "air" it can
    be selected without changing the
    filter.

8 Click the circle and the part's inner face, as shown below.

                                   GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
56 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       9 In the function panel, make sure that
           Wireframe is selected, and then
           click OK.
           Mastercam splits the face.

     10 Delete the circle, as it's no longer
           needed.

     11 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Model Prep, Push-Pull.

     12 Click the portion of the newly split
           face shown in the picture.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                           ALIGNING THE VERTICAL WALL 57

13 Click the red arrow, type -2, and then
      press [Enter] twice.

      Mastercam creates the counterbore.

     14 In the function panel, click OK.

     15 Save the file as FlangeDemo06-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 7: Aligning the Vertical Wall

Next you rotate the vertical wall so the opening aligns with one of the feet. For this
exercise, continue with the part you just saved, or load Flange DemoPart06, which
accompanies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save
it under the new name FlangeDemo06-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Model Prep, Move.

       2 Double-click the top face of the
           vertical wall, as shown.
           Mastercam selects the entire feature.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
58 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

         TIP: A single click picks a face, and a double-click picks a feature. Hold
         down [Shift] while selecting to pick tangent faces.
       3 Click the gnomon button to switch

           to gnomon manipulation mode.

       4 Click the center segment of the
           gnomon's blue arc.
           You have now set the gnomon for
           2D rotation around the Z axis.

       5 Type -10, and press [Enter] twice.

           The gnomon's X axis rotates to
           center on the opening in the vertical
           wall, as shown (in top view).

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                             ALIGNING THE VERTICAL WALL 59

6 Click the gnomon's button to change back to geometry manipulation mode,
    and select the Snap to AutoCursor positions option.

7 Click the right segment of the
    gnomon's blue arc.
    You are now in 3D rotation mode.

8 Move your mouse cursor to the
    center of the hole in the lower foot,
    as shown.
    Because you have Snap to
    AutoCursor positions on, you can
    easily snap the mouse to the hole's
    exact center, which should be an
    angle of -20 degrees.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
60 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       9 Click to set the angle, and then click
           OK in the function panel.
           The opening in the wall is now
           aligned with the hole in the foot, as
           shown.

     10 Save the file as FlangeDemo07-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 8: Expanding the Wall Opening

According to the part's new specifications, you must expand the opening in the wall
must be expanded from 20 degrees to 45 degrees. For this exercise, continue with the
part you just saved, or load FlangeDemo07, which accompanies this tutorial. If you
choose to start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name
FlangeDemo07-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

       1 From Mastercam's menu bar, choose
           Model Prep, Move.

       2 Select all nine faces of the step-like
           portion of the wall.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                          EXPANDING THE WALL OPENING 61

3 Click the gnomon's button to select
    gnomon manipulation mode, and
    place the gnomon at the center of
    the part.

    The gnomon is now set to the center
    of rotation.

4 Switch back to geometry
    manipulation mode, and rotate the
    geometry -12.5 degrees.

5 In the function panel, click OK and
    Create New Operation.

6 Select all three faces of the opposite
    side of the wall opening.

7 Click the gnomon's button to select
    gnomon manipulation mode, and
    place the gnomon at the center of
    the part.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
62 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       8 Switch back to geometry
           manipulation mode, rotate the
           selected geometry 12.5 degrees,
           and click OK in the function panel.

           By rotating each side of the opening by 12.5 degrees, you added 25 degrees
           to the opening, while maintaining its centering on the foot's hole. Your part
           should now look like the picture below.

       9 Save the file as FlangeDemo08-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 9: Increasing the Wall Height

In this exercise, you increase the height of the vertical wall. Continue with the part you
just saved, or load FlangeDemo08, which accompanies this tutorial. If you choose to
start with the tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name FlangeDemo08-
XXX, where XXX is your initials.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                      INCREASING THE WALL HEIGHT 63

1 Choose Model Prep, Push-Pull, and
    select the top face of the wall.

2 Drag the ball on the bottom of the
    arrow down to the bottom of the
    part, as shown in the picture.
    The reference-point ball marks the
    zero point from which the control's
    setting is measured.

3 Place the mouse pointer over the
    arrow.
    You see that the part's height is
    35mm as measured from the
    reference-point ball you placed at
    the bottom of the part.

4 Select all of the wall's six top faces,
    selecting the largest one last, which
    places the arrow in the correct
    orientation.
    These are the faces that you will
    move upward to increase the wall's
    height.

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
64 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       5 Drag the ball back to the bottom.

         TIP: You can change the reference point at any time. Just click the ball
         and move it as needed, including snapping it to other geometry.
       6 Click the red arrow, type 50 followed by [Enter] twice, and click OK in the

           function panel.
           Mastercam changes the wall's height to 50mm, measured from the bottom of
           the part.

       7 Save the file as FlangeDemo09-XXX, where XXX is your initials.

Exercise 10: Adding the Fillet

In this exercise, you add a fillet to the part. Continue with the part you just saved, or
load FlangeDemo09, which accompanies this tutorial. If you choose to start with the

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                        ADDING THE FILLET 65

tutorial file, remember to save it under the new name FlangeDemo09-XXX, where XXX
is your initials.

       1 Choose Model Prep, Push-Pull.

       2 In Mastercam's toolbar, turn off the
           face selection filter and turn on the
           edge selection filter.

       3 Select the wall's inside edge, as
           shown in the image to the right.
           This is where you will create the
           fillet.

       4 Click the red arrow, drag to create a
           10mm fillet, and click to accept the
           change.

       5 In the function panel, click OK to
           finalize the change.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
66 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

           Your finished part should look like the picture below.

       6 Save the file as Flange Demo_Part10-XXX, where XXX is your initials.
           You have now finished modifying the flange part to meet the new
           specifications.

Challenge

In this section, you test your Model Prep knowledge and skills as you make changes to
a solid part. Try to complete the edits on your own. If you have trouble, refer to the
page indicated in each step.
In this challenge, you work on the file named ShippingPullTab, included with this
tutorial. In most cases, this is the only file you need to complete the challenge.
However, a set of files named ShippingPullTab03 through ShippingPullTab07 are
also included with this tutorial and are the results of each of the challenge steps. For
example, ShippingPullTab02 is the result of Step 3.

         NOTE: In most steps, the left picture is a "before" screen shot and the
         right is an "after."
       1 Load the file ShippingPullTab, included with this tutorial. The picture below

           shows the part as it appears in Mastercam.

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                         CHALLENGE 67

2 To avoid overwriting the original, save the file as ShippingPullTab-XXX,
    where XXX is your initials.

3 Remove the flange shown below. (For help, refer to page 43.)

  VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 3.
4 Add a 5mm circular cutout to the part, as shown in the following pictures. (For

    help, refer to page 53.)

                                                                       GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
68 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 4.
       5 Increase the diameter of the indicated features to 2mm. (For help, refer to

           page 51.)

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 5.
       6 Move the indicated feature 4mm to the right, as shown below. (For help, see

           page page 47.)

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                                                   CHALLENGE 69

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 6.
       7 Add a 0.5mm fillet to the 5mm hole, as shown below. (For help, see page

           page 64.)

         VIDEO: Click the icon to watch a video of Step 7.

Conclusion

Congratulations! You have completed the Getting Started with Mastercam Solids tuto-
rial. Now that you have mastered the skills in this tutorial, explore Mastercam's other
features and functions.
You may be interested in other tutorials that we offer. The Mastercam tutorial series is
in continual development, and we will add modules as we complete them. For infor-
mation and availability, please visit our website.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
70 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

Mastercam Resources

Enhance your Mastercam experience by using the following resources:

       Mastercam Help--Also, most dialog boxes and ribbon bars feature a Help
           button that opens Mastercam Help directly to related information.

       Mastercam Reseller--Your local Mastercam Reseller can help with most
           questions about Mastercam.

       Technical Support--CNC Software's Technical Support department (860-875-
           5006 or support@mastercam.com) is open Monday through Friday from 8:00
           a.m. to 5:30 p.m. USA Eastern Standard Time.

       Mastercam University--CNC Software sponsors Mastercam University, an
           affordable online learning platform that gives you 24/7 access to Mastercam
           training materials. Take advantage of more than 180 videos to master your
           skills at your own pace and help prepare yourself for Mastercam Certification.
           For more information on Mastercam University, please contact your
           Authorized Mastercam Reseller, visit www.mastercamu.com, or email
           training@mastercam.com.

       Online communities-- You can find a wealth of information, including many
           videos, at www.mastercam.com.
           For tech tips and the latest Mastercam news, you can join us on Facebook
           (www.facebook.com/mastercam), follow us on Twitter (www.twitter.com/
          mastercam), and subscribe to our blog, Mastercam Xtras (http://
           blog.mastercam.com). Visit our YouTube channel to see Mastercam in action
           (www.youtube.com/user/MastercamCadCam)!

           Registered users can search for information or ask questions on the
           Mastercam Web forum, forum.mastercam.com, or use the knowledge base at
           kb.mastercam.com. To register, select Help, Link on Mastercam.com from
           the Mastercam menu and follow the instructions.

Mastercam Documentation

Mastercam installs the following documents in the \Documentation folder of your
Mastercam installation:

       What's New in Mastercam X8
       Mastercam X8 Installation Guide
       Mastercam X8 Administrator Guide
       Mastercam X8 Transition Guide
       Mastercam X8 Quick Reference Card

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                                                                                                     MASTERCAM DOCUMENTATION 71

       Mastercam X8 Post Debugger User's Guide
       Mastercam X8 ReadMe

Contact Us

For questions about this or other Mastercam documentation, contact the Technical
Documentation department by email at techdocs@mastercam.com.
For assistance with installing Mastercam, its HASP or NetHASP, or to obtain more
information on using Mastercam, contact your local Mastercam Reseller. If your
Reseller is unavailable, you can call CNC Technical Support Services Monday through
Friday, 8:00 a.m.­5:30 p.m., USA Eastern Standard Time.
When calling CNC Software for technical support, please follow these guidelines:

       Be sure you have already tried to contact your Mastercam Reseller.
       Provide the serial number of your HASP or NetHASP.
       Be ready to describe the problem in detail. Write down what happened,

           particularly if you cannot call immediately after the problem occurs.
       Be in front of your computer when you call.

                                                                                GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
72 MASTERCAM X8/ Introduction to Model Prep

       If possible, try to duplicate the problem before calling. Our Support Services
           technician may require you to duplicate the problem while you are on the
           phone.

       When you call, have ready a complete description of your hardware, including
           your operating system (OS), central processing unit (CPU), graphics card and
           settings, and memory.

You can also leave a message for CNC Support Services twenty-four hours a day,
seven days a week via our email or website addresses. When sending email, please
include:

       The serial number of your HASP or NetHASP
       Telephone number and contact information where you can be reached

         TIP: This utility makes it easy to provide your Reseller or CNC Support
         Services with a file attachment that contains the information they need.
         For more information on using Zip2Go, please refer to the Mastercam
         Help.

Important Contact Information

Address      CNC Software, Inc.
             671 Old Post Road
Phone        Tolland, Connecticut, 06084-9970
Fax          USA

             (860) 875-5006

             (860) 872-1565

FTP Address  ftp://ftp.mastercam.com

Internet Address http://www.mastercam.com

Email        support@mastercam.com

GETTING STARTED WITH MASTERCAM SOLIDS
                   Attention! Updates may be available.
      Go to Mastercam.com/Support for the latest downloads.

671 Old Post Road
Tolland, CT 06084 USA
www.mastercam.com
