     Introduction to
Multiaxis Toolpaths
mastercam x getting started tutorials

    Introduction to
    Multiaxis Toolpaths

             December 2011

                        Be sure you have the latest information!

                           Information might have been changed or added since this document was
                           published. Contact your local Reseller for the latest information.
II · INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS

TERMS OF USE  Mastercam® X6 Introduction to Multiaxis Toolpaths

              Date: December 2011
              Copyright © 2011 CNC Software, Inc.-- All rights reserved.
              First Printing: December 2011
              Software: Mastercam X6

              Use of this document is subject to the Mastercam End User License Agreement.
              A copy of the Mastercam End User License Agreement is included with the
              Mastercam product package of which this document is part. The Mastercam
              End User License Agreement can also be found at:
              www.mastercam.com/legal/licenseagreement/
Contents

Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1

     X Tutorial Goals................................................................................................. 1
     X Introduction to Multiaxis Toolpath Requirements ..................................... 1

         General Tutorial Requirements....................................................................... 2

 1. Basic Machine Overview...................................................... 3

     X Table/Table Machine .................................................................................... 4
     X Head/Table Machine..................................................................................... 5
     X Head/Head Machine ..................................................................................... 7

 2. Multiaxis Toolpath Controls Overview ................................. 9

     X Cut Pattern..................................................................................................... 9
     X Tool Axis Control......................................................................................... 10
     X Tool Tip Control ........................................................................................... 11

 3. Mastercam Interface and Workflow.................................. 13

     X Cut Pattern Page ......................................................................................... 14
     X Tool Axis Control Page ............................................................................... 15
     X Collision Control Page................................................................................. 16

 4. Multiaxis Curve Toolpath.................................................... 19

     X Lesson Goals ............................................................................................... 19
     X Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation............................. 19
     X Exercise 2: Create a Multiaxis Curve Toolpath.................................... 21
     X Exercise 3: Backplot the Operation ..................................................... 27
     X Exercise 4: Machine Simulation.......................................................... 29
IV · INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS

 5. Tool Axis Control Options ................................................... 31

     X Lesson Goals ............................................................................................... 31
     X Exercise 1: Preparing the Part ............................................................. 31
     X Exercise 2: Copy and Edit an Operation............................................... 32
     X Exercise 3: Copy and Edit a Second Operation.................................... 35

 6. Multiaxis Drill Toolpath....................................................... 39

     X Lesson Goals ............................................................................................... 39
     X Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation............................. 39
     X Exercise 2: Create a Multiaxis Drill Toolpath ....................................... 41
     X Exercise 3: Add a Second Multiaxis Drill Operation............................. 46
     X Exercise 4: Backplot the operations .................................................... 49

 Conclusion......................................................................................................... 51

     X Mastercam Resources ............................................................................... 51
     X Mastercam Documentation ....................................................................... 53

         Contact Us.................................................................................................... 53
!"#$%&'(#!%"

This tutorial introduces the concepts of multiaxis machining, beginning with the
machine architecture and ending with multiaxis toolpath creation. Multiaxis tool-
paths are basically the familiar contour, pocket, and surface toolpaths in X,Y, and Z,
with rotational motion added in A, B, and C. The available axes vary based on your
particular machine setup.

The workflow is consistent regardless of the Multiaxis toolpath selected.
Mastercam's Multiaxis interface follows a uniform structure through the toolpathing
process. Select the toolpath family, select a toolpath type, progress from top to
bottom through the tree style interface, enter parameters on the necessary pages,
and generate the toolpath. Additional tools such as Backplot and Machine
Simulation allow you to review your toolpath before cutting begins on the machine.

You will gain a general understanding of the multiaxis process by completing this
tutorial. The information contained in these pages will allow you to begin gaining
the knowledge and confidence to work with Mastercam's Multiaxis toolpaths.
Further information on multiaxis toolpaths can be found in subsequent Focus Series
multiaxis tutorials.

Tutorial Goals

       Understand the basic architecture of a multiaxis machine
       Review the controls of a multiaxis toolpath: cut pattern, tool axis control,

           and tool tip control
       Follow the workflow of Mastercam's Multiaxis toolpath interface
       Create and modify a Multiaxis Curve toolpath
       Create and modify a Multiaxis Drill toolpath

Introduction to Multiaxis Toolpath Requirements

       Mastercam X6 with Mill Level 1 or Mastercam Router, or higher level seat
       Curve 5-axis / Drill 5-axis add-on (included in the Multiaxis add-on)

         IMPORTANT: Screen colors in the tutorial pictures were modified to
         enhance image quality; they may not match your Mastercam settings or
         the tutorial results. These color differences do not affect the lesson or
         the exercise results.
2 · INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATH REQUIREMENTS

General Tutorial Requirements

All Mastercam tutorials have the following general requirements:
       You must be comfortable using the Windows® operating system.
       The tutorials cannot be used with Mastercam Demo/Home Learning
           Edition (HLE). The Demo/HLE file format (EMCX-6) is different from
           Mastercam (MCX-6), and basic Mastercam functions, such as file
           conversions and posting, are unavailable.
       Each lesson in the tutorial builds on the mastery of preceding lesson's skills.
           We recommend that you complete them in order.
       Focus Series and Exploring Series tutorials require, at minimum, a mastery of
           the basic Mastercam skills taught in the Getting Started Series modules. A
           general knowledge of machining principals and practices is also required.
       You must have a seat of Mastercam X6 Design or higher to complete most of
           the tutorials in the Getting Started Series.
       The Basic 2D Machining module in the Getting Started Series requires, at
           minimum, a seat of Mill Entry or Router Entry.
       The Basic 3D Machining module in the Getting Started Series requires Mill
           Level 3 or Router Pro.
       Additional files may accompany a tutorial. Unless the tutorial provides
           specific instructions on where to place these files, store them in a folder that
           can be accessed from the Mastercam workstation, either with the tutorial or
           in any location that you prefer.
       The Getting Started Series tutorials are available in an Adobe® Flash®
           compatible video format. Additional tutorial videos may also be available.
           Contact your local Mastercam Reseller for more information.
       You must install Adobe Flash Player to display tutorial videos. You can
           download Adobe Flash Player from www.adobe.com.
       All Mastercam tutorials require you to configure Mastercam to work in a
           default metric or English configuration. The tutorial provides instructions
           for loading the appropriate configuration file.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",-

Basic Machine Overview

1

The first thing to notice about a multiaxis machine is the additional axes available.
Instead of a straightforward machine with XYZ axes capabilities, you now have a
machine capable of handling five or more axes of motion. Typically the axes are
defined as XYZ / ABC / UVW as shown below.

The axes may be in a different orientation, or have different relationships. The main
point is that your machine now has a much greater range of motion than a standard
3-axis vertical or horizontal machine.
The added motion of a multiaxis machine greatly enhances the capabilities of your
shop, as well as expanding the variety of parts that can be machined. However, due
to the enhanced power of the machine, there really is no such thing as a "standard
5-axis machine". Nearly every machine is unique in its axes combination, orienta-
tion, travel and rotation limits, and controller.
Common terms for multiaxis machines are table/table, head/table, and head/head.
These terms describe the relationship of the rotary components on the machine.
4 · TABLE/TABLE MACHINE

The configuration of the rotaries determines the zero location of the machine and
how you need to locate the part within Mastercam. The part must be located in
Mastercam where it will be sitting on the machine. The only exception is for a head/
head arrangement.

         IMPORTANT: Improper location of your geometry will cause the part to
         be cut incorrectly.

Table/Table Machine

A table/table machine has both rotary axes connected and attached to the table.
Typically this is a trunnion carrying a rotary table. The machine axes zero position is
located at the intersection of rotary axes. Your part is located in Mastercam relative
to the machine zero position. The rotary components are shown in red in the images
below.

                                          Table/Table configuration

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                         BASIC MACHINE OVERVIEW · 5

                                           Table/Table machine zero

Head/Table Machine

A head/table machine has one rotary on the table and the other on the spindle. They
operate independently of each other. The table could be comprised of a trunnion or
simply a rotary attached to the table. The machine axis zero is located at the inter-
section of the rotary axes. Your part is located in Mastercam relative to the machine
zero position, as in the table/table configuration. The rotary components are shown
in red in the following images.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
6 · HEAD/TABLE MACHINE

                                           Head/Table configuration

                                        Head/Table machine zero

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                         BASIC MACHINE OVERVIEW · 7

Head/Head Machine

A head/head machine has both rotary axes connected and attached to the spindle.
The machine axis zero is typically located on the face of the spindle. The origin is
shown on the table in the second image as this is where the spindle face lies when all
axes are set to zero. The rotary components are shown in red in the images below.

                                        Head/Head configuration

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
8 · HEAD/HEAD MACHINE

                                    Head/Head machine zero

These are the basic arrangements of multiaxis machines. Be aware that multiaxis
machines may be as simple as a single rotary for 4-axis work, or as complex as having
five axes and a nutating head. No matter how the machine is configured, the inputs
for a good toolpath follow the same pattern from machine to machine. Continue on
to Lesson 2 to learn about the necessary controls for creating an efficient multiaxis
toolpath.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",.

Multiaxis Toolpath Controls

2

Overview

Three controls separate multiaxis toolpaths from the typical 2- and 3-axis toolpaths:

       Cut Pattern
       Tool Axis Control
       Tool Tip Control
Effective use of these controls is the deciding factor in your ability to create efficient
toolpaths for your particular machine. This tutorial starts you on the path to
becoming a more effective programmer. However, there is no substitute for experi-
ence and knowing your machine's capabilities.

Cut Pattern

What do I want the tool to follow? The answer is the cut pattern. Selecting a toolpath
family is the initial phase of establishing the cut pattern. Different toolpath families
vary the type of geometry allowed for the cut pattern. Geometry selection can range
from a contour or chain, to a surface edge or edges, and on through single or
multiple surfaces or solids. Below are two examples of cut pattern selections.

Curve     Surface
10 · TOOL AXIS CONTROL

In addition to the geometry selected for the toolpath, cut pattern includes such
parameters as:

       Cutting method: zigzag, one way, spiral
       Compensation: type and direction
       Stock to leave: drive surfaces, walls
       Stepover: across, along, increment
Subsequent lessons and tutorials will cover cut pattern options in more detail.

Tool Axis Control

How do I want my tool axis to behave as it follows the cut pattern? Tool axis control
answers this question. Multiaxis toolpaths include numerous options on how to
manipulate the tool axis. The options allow you to control the part of the tool in
contact with the material, and the amount of tool movement the toolpath generates,
as well as being able to set the number of axes of output for the posted toolpath.
Below are two examples of tool axis control.

Surface                 From point

Toolpath family and toolpath type determine which tool axis controls you can
access. Some examples of the controls available include:

       Classic: Lines, surface, from point, chain
       Wireframe: Tilted relative to cutting direction, tilted through curve

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                          MULTIAXIS TOOLPATH CONTROLS OVERVIEW · 11

       Surface/Solid: Tilted from curve away, tilted with fixed angle to axis
       Drill/Circle Mill: Parallel to line, surface, plane
       Convert to 5x: Tilted through lines, tilted through point
       Custom App: Set automatically for these toolpath types
Click the Help button to find further details on the available options and their func-
tion.

Tool Tip Control

What controls the depth of the tool along the tool axis? Tool tip control handles this
function. Compensation surfaces are included in tool tip control. Applying tool tip
control is a three step process:

       1 Tool positions are generated along the selected cut pattern.

       2 Tool axis vectors are created at each position based on the tool axis control
           settings.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
12 · TOOL TIP CONTROL

       3 Depth along the tool axis is applied based on the tip compensation method.

         TIP: Use the method depicted above when you have very complicated,
         or less than perfect, part geometry. The clean core geometry is used to
         generate the cut pattern and tool axis control vectors. Tip control is then
         used to cut the outer surfaces with much cleaner motion.
The three controls described above form the core of all your multiaxis toolpaths.
Additional refinement is added through collision control, linking, tool selection, and
more. Building confidence with these controls will greatly ease and enhance your
ability to generate efficient multiaxis toolpaths. Continue on to Lesson 3 to see how
these controls are an integral part of the multiaxis workflow within Mastercam.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",/

Mastercam Interface and Workflow

3

Mastercam's Multiaxis toolpath interface follows the familiar tree-style layout intro-
duced in recent releases. You progress through the pages of the tree, make the neces-
sary selections, enter appropriate parameters, and generate your toolpath. Viewing
the process in simplified terms helps to lessen the complexity of creating a multiaxis
toolpath.

Begin the toolpath creation process by selecting an appropriate machine definition.
This applies to all toolpath types in Mastercam. After selecting a machine definition
that supports multiaxis movement, choose the Multiaxis option from the Toolpaths
menu. The following image shows the starting point for a Curve toolpath, found in
the Classic toolpath family.

                                 1) Toolpath Type page selection

                                 2) Classic toolpath family selection

                                 3) Curve toolpath type selection
14 · CUT PATTERN PAGE

Multiaxis toolpaths are divided into six toolpath families. Each toolpath family
contains different toolpath types. Selecting the most efficient type will come from
experience and usage. For now, let's focus on the general workflow rather than
specific applications.

The tree structure provides the basic roadmap to
creating a toolpath. While you are free to select the
pages as needed, the most efficient route is to travel
from top to bottom. Click the plus sign in front of any
page to expose additional pages for input.
The pages within the tree structure vary with the tool-
path type. The procedure remains the same regardless
of what the tree looks like. Answer the questions:

       What do I want the tool to follow?
       How do I want my tool axis to behave?
       What controls the depth along the tool axis?
And you are well on your way to generating a multiaxis
toolpath.

Cut Pattern Page

The pages discussed in the previous lesson are the pivotal pages for multiaxis work.
The cut pattern page is where you select your drive geometry, set compensation

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                               MASTERCAM INTERFACE AND WORKFLOW · 15

parameters, and set various other options. Below is a sample of the cut pattern page
for a multiaxis Curve toolpath.

Tool Axis Control Page

The Tool Axis Control page defines the tilting motion of the tool axis as it moves
along the cut pattern. The options available vary by toolpath type, just as the tree
structure and other pages vary. Tool axis control is what sets multiaxis toolpaths
apart from 2- and 3-axis toolpaths. The ability to manipulate the tool axis allows for

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
16 · COLLISION CONTROL PAGE

complex and powerful control. Below is a sample of the Tool Axis Control page for a
multiaxis Curve toolpath.

Collision Control Page

Tool tip control does not have its own page like the other two controls. It can be
found on the Collision Control page. Use the parameters to instruct Mastercam how

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                               MASTERCAM INTERFACE AND WORKFLOW · 17

the tip of the tool should be placed in relation to the cut pattern. Below is a sample of
the Collision Control page for a multiaxis Curve toolpath.

Complete the remaining pages in the tree if necessary. Additional parameters
include linking information (how the tool moves when not in contact with material)
and roughing options. The Additional Settings branch provides pages that generally
do not need to be touched for multiaxis programming. Review them and click Help if
you would like to know details about these pages. Continue on to Lesson 4 to begin
creating a multiaxis Curve toolpath.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
18 · COLLISION CONTROL PAGE
INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",0

Multiaxis Curve Toolpath

4

Experience with design and toolpath creation is assumed at this point of the tutorial.
Detailed steps on such actions as selecting a machine definition, changing the
graphics view or construction plane, or making levels visible, will not be provided.
Please review the Basic 3D Design and Basic 3D Machining tutorials before
continuing if you are not familiar with these concepts.

Lesson Goals

       Open a part file and assign a machine definition.
       Create a Multiaxis Curve toolpath.
       Backplot the toolpath.

Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation

Assigning a machine definition is the first essential step in creating a toolpath.
Setting the graphics view to allow the easiest geometry selection plays a small part in
visualizing your work. This exercise guides you through the initial steps involved
with creating a toolpath.

       1 Start Mastercam using your
           preferred method:

           Double-click Mastercam's
               desktop icon.
               Or

           Launch Mastercam from the
               Windows Start menu.

       2 Select the default metric configuration file:
20 · GETTING STARTED WITH TOOLPATH CREATION

           a Select Settings, Configuration
               from Mastercam's menu.

           b Choose ...\mcamxm.config <Metric> from the Current drop-down list.
           c Click OK.
       3 Open the part file Curve_Toolpath.MCX-6, which was provided with the
           tutorial.

       4 Select the default Mill metric machine definition.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                   MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH · 21

         Note: The default machine definition has rotary axes defined that allow
         multiaxis toolpaths. Load the machine definition of your choice as long as
         it supports 5-axis motion.
       5 Set your graphics view to Isometric.
       6 Activate shading if necessary.
       7 Fit the geometry to the screen using [Alt+F1] or the Fit button.
       8 Choose File, Save As, and save the part under a different file name. This

           protects the original tutorial file from being overwritten.

Exercise 2: Create a Multiaxis Curve Toolpath

Creating a toolpath involves selecting the toolpath type, tool, and geometry, as well
as completing the parameter pages. Completing this process yields a program
capable of cutting your part on a machine.

       1 From the Mastercam menu, choose
           Toolpaths, Multiaxis.

       2 Click OK if prompted to enter a new
           NC file name.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
22 · CREATE A MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH

       3 Select Classic and Curve on the
           Toolpath Type page.

       4 Select Tool from the Tree View pane.
       5 Click the Select library tool button.

           The tool library defined in the
           machine definition opens.
       6 Select the 8mm ball endmill and click OK.

       7 Select Cut Pattern from the Tree View pane.
       8 Choose 3D Curves from the Curve type drop-down selection.

       9 Click the Select button next to 3D Curves to return to the graphics window
           for curve selection.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                            MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH · 23

10 Select the chain on the edge of the part as shown. The start position is not
      important for the purpose of the tutorial. The chain should go in a clockwise
      direction, regardless of the start point.

11 Click OK on the Chaining dialog box to return to the Cut Pattern page.

                                                                             INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
24 · CREATE A MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH

     12 Set the remaining parameters as shown.

         TIP: The radial offset value for this particular operation should equal the
         tool radius. Use this field in a similar manner as a stock to leave. A value
         equal to the tool radius is equivalent to zero stock to leave. Take advan-
         tage of this functionality for trimming operations.
     13 Select Tool Axis Control from the Tree View pane.
     14 Choose To point from the Tool axis control drop-down selection.

     15 Click the Select button next to To point to return to the graphics window for
           point selection.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                           MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH · 25

16 Select the point as indicated.

      You return to the Tool Axis Control
      page as soon as you select the
      point.

17 Set the remaining parameters as shown.

    TIP: Click in a field to see a progressive image on the right side of the
    page. The image depicts what the field controls. Click Help for detailed
    information on each field.
18 Select Collision Control from the Tree View pane.

                                                                             INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
26 · CREATE A MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH

     19 Set Vector depth to -10.0. The value allows the curve operation to trim the
           part with the side of the tool, avoiding the ball portion at the tip.

The images below show how the difference between vector depth values
affects the toolpath.

Vector depth = 0.0  Vector depth = negative

     20 Select Roughing from the Tree View pane.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                           MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH · 27

21 Deselect Multi Passes.

      Trimming operations using a Curve
      toolpath generally utilize a single
      pass.

22 Click OK to generate the multiaxis curve toolpath on the selected geometry.

     23 Save your part file.

Exercise 3: Backplot the Operation

Backplotting an operation allows you to review the tool motion before any cutting
takes place on the actual machine. Backplot should be the first step in validating
your toolpath.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
28 · BACKPLOT THE OPERATION

       1 Click Backplot selected operations
           in the Toolpath Manager.

       2 In the Backplot dialog box, select
           the Display tool and Display rapid
           moves buttons.

       3 Click Options in the Backplot
           dialog box.

       4 Deselect the options shown and
           click OK. This prevents your part
           from spinning around and moving
           out of view.

       5 Click Play to begin the backplot of your toolpath.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                   MULTIAXIS CURVE TOOLPATH · 29

       6 Click OK in the Backplot dialog box when you have finished reviewing the
           tool motion.

Exercise 4: Machine Simulation

Machine simulation is the next step in validating your operations. The tool motion is
shown on your part as it is positioned on your machine. Collisions between various
machine components and the part are visually apparent as well as being reported in
text on the screen. The following is a quick run-through of Machine Simulation. For a
more detailed explanation, review Help as well as the Focus Series Tutorial: Machine
Simulation.

       1 Right-click in Mastercam's toolbar
           area.

       2 Select Machine Simulation from
           the list of toolbars to make it visible.
           The Machine Simulation toolbar is
           not on by default.

       3 Click Simulation startup settings
           to select a machine to display the
           motion on.

       4 Select 6_5AXGEN_VMCHTAC from
           the drop-down list of machines.
           The machine selection is saved with
           the part file. Running simulation on
           the same part file will reload the
           selected machine.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
30 · MACHINE SIMULATION

       5 Click Simulate to begin the
           machine simulation of the selected
           operation.

       6 Use the simulation playback buttons to review the tool motion contained in
           your operations.

       7 Click Exit from within machine
           simulation to return to the
           Mastercam interface.

       8 Save your part file. The same file will be used in a subsequent lesson.
You have now completed a basic multiaxis curve toolpath. Curve is generally used
for trimming operations. The motion is typically straightforward, making it an ideal
toolpath for demonstrating some different tool axis control strategies and the effects
they can produce on the tool. Proceed to Lesson 5 to explore these strategies.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",1

Tool Axis Control Options

5

Tool axis control is what separates multiaxis toolpaths from normal surface, chain,
and point toolpaths. The ability to manipulate the angle of the tool, relative to the
cut pattern, puts a great amount of control in your hands. The cut speed, finish
quality, and tool life can all be affected with tool axis control. Complete this lesson to
gain exposure with two additional tool axis control options for a multiaxis Curve
toolpath.

Lesson Goals

       Open a previously saved part.
       Edit the operation's parameters, specifically tool axis control.
       Generate the toolpath and observe the tool motion.

Exercise 1: Preparing the Part

       1 Use File, Open to open the part file saved in the previous lesson. If the file is
           unavailable, open the part file Curve_Toolpath_Lesson_5.MCX-6, which
           was provided with the tutorial.

       2 Set your graphics view to Isometric.

       3 Activate shading if necessary.
       4 Fit the geometry to the screen using [Alt+F1] or the Fit button.
       5 Choose File, Save As, and save the part under a different file name. This

           protects the original tutorial file from being overwritten.
32 · COPY AND EDIT AN OPERATION

Exercise 2: Copy and Edit an Operation

       1 Right-click on the first operation
           and hold the mouse button down.

       2 Drag the operation to a position
           farther down the Toolpath
           Manager.

       3 Release the right mouse button and
           select Copy after.

       4 Select operation 1 and turn off the
           toolpath display. Press [T] or click
           Toggle display on selected
           operations.
           The visible toolpath belongs to
           operation 2.

       5 Use the Level Manager to make level 7:Chain visible.
           The geometry on level 7 is used for tool axis control in this exercise.

       6 Click Parameters under operation
           2. The Multiaxis Toolpath - Curve
           dialog box opens.

       7 Select Tool from the Tree View pane.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                     TOOL AXIS CONTROL OPTIONS · 33

8 Enter Chain in the Comment box.

    A comment helps to distinguish
    operations of the same toolpath
    type.

 9 Select Tool Axis Control from the Tree View pane.
10 Choose Chain from the tool axis control drop-down selection.

11 Click Select to open the Chain Options dialog box.

12 Select Closest point on chain, then
      click the Select Chain button.

                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
34 · COPY AND EDIT AN OPERATION

     13 Select the chain as shown.

     14 Click OK in the Chaining dialog box and the Chain Options dialog box. You
           return to the Tool Axis Control page.

     15 Click OK to accept the parameter changes.
     16 Click Regenerate all dirty

           operations in the Toolpath
           Manager.

     17 Backplot the operation to observe the tool motion.
     18 Save your part file.
At this point in the lesson, take a moment to review the two operations created.
Operation 1 uses To point for tool axis control. The tool is always pointing at the
selected point. Operation 2 uses Chain for tool axis control. The tool is always
pointing from a point on the chain, in this case, the closest point of the chain. The
different options create drastically different tool and machine motion. The edge of
the part will also have a different taper depending on the tool axis.
Toggle the toolpath display for the two operations so that they are both visible.
Notice the different tool angle around the entire part shown below. Backplot the
operations to see the different tool motion. Select both operations and run Machine
Simulation as in the previous lesson. A collision is reported for operation 2 before

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                  TOOL AXIS CONTROL OPTIONS · 35

you even run the simulation. This indicates that using the existing chain for tool axis
control is not going to work on this particular machine. This does not indicate a bad
toolpath; only the fact that this toolpath will not run on the selected machine.

Exercise 3: Copy and Edit a Second Operation

       1 Right-click on the second operation and hold the mouse button down.
       2 Drag the operation to a position farther down the Toolpath Manager.
       3 Release the right mouse button and select Copy after.
       4 Select operation 2 and turn off the toolpath display. Press [T] or click the

           Toggle display on selected operations button.
           Toggle the display for operations 1 and 2 so both are off.
       5 Use the Level Manager to make level 8:Tool axis lines visible. Turn off the
           display of levels 1, 6, and 7.
       6 Click Parameters under operation
           3. The Multiaxis Toolpath - Curve
           dialog box opens.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
36 · COPY AND EDIT A SECOND OPERATION

       7 Select Tool from the Tree View pane.
       8 Enter Lines in the Comment box.
       9 Select Tool Axis Control from the Tree View pane.
     10 Choose Lines from the Tool axis control drop-down selection.
     11 Click Select to open the Lines Tool Axis Control dialog box.
     12 Click the Window select lines

           button to select lines for tool axis
           control.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                  TOOL AXIS CONTROL OPTIONS · 37

     13 Draw a selection window around the entire part. Only lines are selected.

     14 Click OK in the Lines Tool Axis Control dialog box. You return to the Tool
           Axis Control page.

     15 Click OK to accept the parameter changes.
     16 Click the Regenerate all dirty

           operations button in the Toolpath
           Manager.
     17 Backplot the operation to observe
           the tool motion.
     18 Save your part file.
Review the tool motion for operation 3. Observe how the tool axis lines up with each
line as it approaches that point in the toolpath. The axis transitions from alignment
with one line as it moves to the next. Use as many lines as necessary to achieve the
desired motion.
Use Backplot and Machine Simulation to review the tool and machine motion for all
three operations. The subtle differences in tool axis control put a great deal of power
in your hands for generating complex toolpaths. Tool axis control is a key element to
all multiaxis toolpaths, no matter which options are available on the page.
Proceed to Lesson 6 where you will create two Multiaxis Drill operations using two of
the tool axis control methods available for that toolpath type.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
38 · COPY AND EDIT A SECOND OPERATION
INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
)*++%",2

Multiaxis Drill Toolpath

6

Multiaxis drill toolpaths differ from other multiaxis toolpaths in several ways:

       Limited cut pattern selection: points or points/lines
       Restricted tool axis control: parallel to line, surface, or plane
       Fewer tip control options: point, projected point, or compensation surface
The power of multiaxis drill becomes apparent on parts that contain multiple holes
with center lines pointing in different directions. Your multiaxis machine is capable
of drilling many different holes with a single fixture setup, saving time and increasing
productivity.

Lesson Goals

       Open a part file and assign a machine definition.
       Create some Multiaxis Drill operations.
       Backplot the operations.

Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation

Assigning a machine definition is the first essential step in creating a toolpath.
Setting the graphics view to allow the easiest geometry selection plays a small part in
visualizing your work. This exercise guides you through the initial steps involved
with creating a toolpath.
40 · GETTING STARTED WITH TOOLPATH CREATION

       1 Open the part file Drill_Toolpath.MCX-6, which was provided with the
           tutorial.

       2 Select the default Mill metric machine definition.
         Note: The default machine definition has rotary axes defined that allow
         multiaxis toolpaths. Load the machine definition of your choice as long as
         it supports 5-axis motion.

       3 Set your graphics view to Isometric.
       4 Activate shading if necessary.
       5 Fit the geometry to the screen using [Alt+F1] or the Fit button.
       6 Choose File, Save As, and save the part under a different file name. This

           protects the original tutorial file from being overwritten.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                    MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 41

Exercise 2: Create a Multiaxis Drill Toolpath

      1 From the Mastercam menu, choose
           Toolpaths, Multiaxis.

      2 Click OK if prompted to enter new
           NC file name.

      3 Select Drill/Circle Mill and Drill on the Toolpath Type page.

      4 Select Tool from the Tree View pane.
      5 Click the Select library tool button.

           The library defined in the machine
           definition opens.

                                                                                    INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
42 · CREATE A MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH

       6 Select the 10mm drill and click OK.
           Adjust the tool filter settings as
           necessary to make tool selection
           easier.

       7 Select Cut Pattern from the Tree View pane.
       8 Choose Points for the entity type.

       9 Select Peck Drill for the cycle and set the subsequent parameters.

           Cycle selection determines the available parameters. Choose different
           cycles to review the parameters.
     10 Click Select to return to the graphics window for point selection.
     11 Select Window Points in the Drill
           Point Selection dialog box.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                         MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 43

12 Create a window around the visible
      points.

      The point geometry is on level 1.

13 Click OK in the Drill Point Selection dialog box to return to the Cut Pattern
      page.

14 Select Tool Axis Control from the Tree View pane.
15 Choose Surface for Tool axis

      control and 5 axis for Output
      format.

16 Click Select to return to the graphics window for surface selection.

                                         INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
44 · CREATE A MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH

     17 Select the surface as shown. Rotate the geometry as needed to allow
           selection.

           The surface is on level 5. Use the Level Manager to make it visible if
           necessary.
         TIP: Manipulating the visible levels makes the selection process easier
         and less susceptible to error.
     18 Press [Enter] or click End Selection when done.
     19 Select Collision Control from the Tree View pane.
     20 Set Tip control to Compensation
           surface.
           Click Help for an explanation of the
           different tip control options.

     21 Click the Select button next to Compensation surface. The Toolpath/
           surface selection dialog box opens.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                           MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 45

22 Click Select to select surfaces in the
      graphics window.

23 Select the surface as shown. Rotate
      the geometry as needed to allow
      selection.
      The surface is on level 4. Use the
      Level Manager to make it visible if
      necessary.

24 Press [Enter] or click End Selection when done.
25 Click OK in the Toolpath/surface selection dialog box.

                                           INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
46 · ADD A SECOND MULTIAXIS DRILL OPERATION

     26 Click OK to generate the multiaxis drill toolpath on the selected points.

     27 Save your part file.

Exercise 3: Add a Second Multiaxis Drill Operation

       1 Turn off the display of level 1, and make level 3 visible in the Level Manager.
       2 From the Mastercam menu, choose Toolpaths, Multiaxis.
       3 Select Drill/Circle Mill and Drill on the Toolpath Type page.
       4 Select Tool from the Tree View pane.
       5 Select the 10mm drill shown in the

           tool list.

       6 Select Cut Pattern from the Tree View pane.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                            MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 47

7 Choose Points/Lines for the entity type.

 8 The Cycle should still be on Peck drill. Set it if necessary.

 9 Click Select to return to the graphics window for point selection.

10 Select Window Points in the Drill
      Point Selection dialog box.

11 Draw a window around the visible
      points.
      Change the view to Back and rotate
      the geometry as needed to bring the
      points/lines into view. The points
      for this operation are on the back
      side of the part.

    Note: It is not necessary to select the lines, even though the entity type is set
    to Points/Lines. The lines are automatically selected as long as they end on
    the point.

12 Click OK in the Drill Point Selection dialog box to return to the Cut Pattern
      page.

13 Select Tool Axis Control from the Tree View pane.

                                                                             INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
48 · ADD A SECOND MULTIAXIS DRILL OPERATION

     14 Check Output format to be sure it is set to 5 axis. Notice how Tool axis
           control is set to Points/Lines. The lines attached to the points are
           automatically set as the tool axis control.

     15 Select Collision Control from the Tree View pane.
     16 Set Tip control to Original point.

     17 Activate Tip compensation by
           selecting the checkbox. Set Break
           through to 2.0.
           The break through value
           determines how far the full
           diameter of the drill will penetrate
           beyond the selected tip control
           geometry.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                    MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 49

     18 Click OK to generate the multiaxis drill toolpath on the selected points.

     19 Save your part file.

Exercise 4: Backplot the operations

      1 Set your graphics view to Isometric.
      2 In the Toolpath Manager, click

           Select all operations.

                                                                                    INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
50 · BACKPLOT THE OPERATIONS

       3 Click Backplot selected operations
           in the Toolpath Manager.

       4 In the Backplot dialog box, select
           the Display tool and Display rapid
           moves buttons.

       5 Click Options in the Backplot
           dialog box.

       6 Deselect the options shown and
           click OK. This prevents your part
           from spinning around and moving
           out of view.

       7 Click Play to begin the backplot of your toolpath.

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                     MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 51

       8 Click OK in the Backplot dialog box when you have finished reviewing the
           tool motion.

You have now completed a multiaxis drill toolpath. While the simplest of the multi-
axis toolpaths, care must be taken when selecting geometry, tool axis control, and tip
control methods. The differences between the control methods are subtle but can
produce drastically different tool motion.

Conclusion

Congratulations! You have completed the Introduction to Multiaxis Toolpaths tuto-
rial. Now that you have mastered the skills in this tutorial, explore Mastercam's other
features and functions. Additional tutorials may be available in this or other series.
This is a module of the Mastercam Getting Started Tutorial Series. The series intro-
duces general Mastercam functions and teaches basic skills for getting started with
Mastercam. Other tutorial series include:

       Focus Series: Focuses on a specific Mastercam feature--for example, Setup
           Sheets or FBM Drill, and teaches basic and advanced skills.

       Exploring Series: Explores a single Mastercam product--for example
           Mastercam® for SolidWorks® or Mastercam Swiss Expert, and teaches in-
           depth skills for working with the product.

The Mastercam tutorial series is in continual development, and we will add modules
as we complete them. For information and availability or for further training, please
contact your local Mastercam Reseller.

Mastercam Resources

Enhance your Mastercam experience by using the following resources:
       Mastercam Help--Access Mastercam Help by selecting Help, Contents from
           Mastercam's menu bar or by pressing [Alt+H] on your keyboard. Also, most
           dialog boxes and ribbon bars feature a Help buttonthat opens Mastercam
           Help directly to related information.
       Mastercam Reseller--Your local Mastercam Reseller can help with most
           questions about Mastercam.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
52 · MASTERCAM RESOURCES

       Technical Support--CNC Software's Technical Support department (860-
           875-5006 or support@mastercam.com) is open Monday through Friday
           from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. USA Eastern Standard Time.

       Mastercam University--CNC Software sponsors Mastercam University, an
           affordable online learning platform that gives you 24/7 access to Mastercam
           training materials. Take advantage of more than 180 videos to master your
           skills at your own pace and help prepare yourself for Mastercam
           Certification. For more information on Mastercam University, please
           contact your Authorized Mastercam Reseller, visit www.mastercamu.com,
           or email training@mastercam.com.

       Online communities--You can search for information or ask questions on
           the Mastercam Web forum, located at www.emastercam.com. You can also
           find a wealth of information, including many videos, at
           www.mastercam.com and www.mastercamedu.com.
           For tech tips and the latest Mastercam news, you can join us on Facebook
           (www.facebook.com/mastercam), follow us on Twitter (www.twitter.com/
           mastercam), and subscribe to our blog, Mastercam Xtras (http://
           blog.mastercam.com). Visit our YouTube channel to see Mastercam in
           action (www.youtube.com/user/MastercamCadCam)!

INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
                                                                                                     MULTIAXIS DRILL TOOLPATH · 53

Mastercam Documentation

Mastercam installs the following documents in the \Documentation folder of your
Mastercam installation:

       Mastercam X6 Quick Start
       Mastercam X6 Administrator Guide
       Mastercam X6 Transition Guide
       Mastercam X6 Quick Reference Card
       Mastercam X6 File Location Card
       Mastercam X6 Post Debugger User's Guide

Contact Us

For questions about this or other Mastercam documentation, contact the Technical
Documentation department by email at techdocs@mastercam.com.

                                                                                     INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
54 · MASTERCAM DOCUMENTATION
INTRODUCTION TO MULTIAXIS TOOLPATHS
               Attention! Updates may be available.
  Go to Mastercam.com/Support for the latest downloads.

671 Old Post Road
Tolland, CT 06084 USA
www.mastercam.com

Printed in the USA on 100% Post Consumer Waste, FSC Stocks
