Application Tutorial | InventorCAM 2024

5X Basic Training | Vol. 1

                                                iMachining 2D
                                                iMachining 3D
                                                2.5D Milling
                                                Indexial Multi-Sided
                                                HSS Machining
                                                3D High Speed Milling
                                                Simultaneous 5-Axis
                                                Turning
                                                Advanced Mill-Turn
                                                Swiss-Type
                                                Solid Probe
          Contents

Contents

1. Introduction................................................................................................................... 1
2. Opening the Part & Starting InventorCAM.................................................................. 3
3. Milling Part Data............................................................................................................ 7
4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path.......................................................................................... 11

          i
Introduction  1
About this course
This tutorial illustrates the advanced concepts of 5 Axis machining, post and machine simulation settings, basic parameters
used in defining the tool path, parallel strategies of 5-Axis machining, and creating machine simulation.
Prerequisites
Students attending this course are expected to have basic knowledge of the InventorCAM software.
Course design
This course is designed around a task-based approach to training. The guided exercises will teach you the necessary
commands and options to complete a machining task.
Using this book
This tutorial is intended to be used in a classroom environment under the guidance of an experienced instructor. It is also
intended to be a self-study tutorial. This book is made with InventorCAM 2024 SP1.

2
  2 Opening the Part

& Starting InventorCAM
Before starting InventorCAM, you need to do the following settings that will enable you to select the right post processor
and the machine associated with the post processor.
1. Go to the Autodesk Inventor ribbon and select InventorCAM 2024 > CAM Settings.

2. In InventorCAM Settings, you must pay attention to the path for machine simulation files and the location of the
post processor.

                By default, the post processor files and the
                machine simulation files are located on this path:
                /root/Program Files/InventorCAM/Gpptool.
                But, it is a good practice to create separate folders
                in the root directory for the post processor and
                the machine simulation. For example, C:/GPP
                & C:/Machine_Sim. The advantage of creating
                separate folders is that the post processor and
                machine simulation files remain intact even
                when the InventorCAM version is uninstalled or
                upgraded.
3. Click CAM-Part.
4. Ensure that the settings are as shown in the image.
5. Click OK to exit the InventorCAM Settings window.

4
                                            2. Opening the part and starting InventorCAM

6. Browse and open Basic Training.ipt.
7. Click InventorCAM 2024 > New > Milling.

The New Milling Part window displays.

When the Use Model file directory check box is selected, InventorCAM saves the
entire project in the location of the Autodesk Inventor part file. If the box is not
checked, it stores the project in the "User" directory. It is recommended that you
select Use Model file directory check box.

CAM-Part name - The name of the part is always derived from the Autodesk Inventor part file name. If a CAM part
already exists, then InventorCAM uses the suffixes -1, -2 to create alternate names.

8. Click O K.

The Milling Part Data window displays.

                                            5
6
Milling Part Data  3
In the Milling Part Data window, you must define the CAM part for machining.
Post Processor Definition
1. Select the post processor/machine that will be used to machine the part. The selection of the post/machine
depends on the part to be machined and the availability of the machine with the customer.
In this example, if you closely observe the part, you will notice that we need to machine the periphery of the part and
also cut some pockets. Although a standard Table-Table Machine would serve the purpose, it is better to machine this on
a Head-Table configuration of the machine. As we have a cylindrical part, it is advisable to use the DMU 100 Monoblock
kind of a machine which has a tilting head and a rotary table. In our case, the rotary axis of the table is around X axis.
This axis is also known as the A axis. The following figure explains the industry standard nomenclature that is used to
represent axis:
The part used in this tutorial will rotate around X axis and the head will tilt around Y axis. So, this machine will have A
and B axis.

                                              Rotation Around X Axis = A Axis
                                              Rotation Around Y Axis = B Axis
                                              Rotation Around Z Axis = C Axis
2. In the CNC - Machine list, click FANUC5a.
Coordinate System Definition

8
                                                                                                                               3. Milling Part Data
Coordinate System Definition
The coordinate system on the part must reflect the machine axis. In this tutorial, the part is cylindrical in shape, and one
of the axis of the machine is rotating around X axis. Therefore, the X axis of the coordinate system must be the rotating
axis. Do the following:
3. Click CoordSys in the Define section.
The CoordSys window opens which has the options to define a coordinate system. Use the most relevant option for
cylindrical parts. The most relevant option is to align one axis along the axis of revolution of the cylinder.
4. In the Place CoordSys origin to list, click Center of revolution face.
5. Select the face as shown in the image.

As our axis of rotation on the machine table is around X axis, we must align
our X axis along the axis of revolution of the cylinder. And, the Z axis must
denote the depth axis.

You can do this using the Modify by flip functionality available in InventorCAM.
Select Change to opposite button to shift the coordinate position on the other side.
It must now look like as shown in the image.

Now, using the Modify by flip functionality, align the X axis to the axis of revolution of the cylinder. Ensure that the Z
axis is pointing to the depth, and the Y axis is denoting the tilting head

                                                                                                                                                        9
The resultant coordinate system must look as shown in the image.
6. Click
The CoordSys Data window displays

7. Enter the parameters as shown in the image.
8. Click
9. Click in the CoordSys Manager window.
10. Click to come out of the Milling Part Data window.

Target definition
To define the part, do the following:
11. Right click Target in the CAM tree manager > Define.

12. Select the part as shown in the image.
13. Click

10
4 Creating a 5-Axis Tool
            Path
We will now create our first 5 Axis Tool path and learn some basic functionality in InventorCAM 5 Axis Simultaneous
Milling.
1. Right click Operations > Machine setup > Add at start of operations tree.
2. Click Part Mounting [MAC-1 (1- Position)] and enter a
value of 250 in the Z column.
3. Click OK.

4. Right click Setup > Add Milling Operation > Sim 5
Axis Milling.
Sim 5 Axis Machining always works with the 1st position of
any coordinate system. For example, MAC1 POS1, MAC2
POS1, MAC3 POS1 etc. It never allows you to select any
other positions of the coordinate system.

5. In the Technology list, click Parallel cuts.
6. Click Geometry.
The Geometry area is subdivided into 3 groups.
1. Geometry selection area
2. Work type
3. The area to be cut and other parameters

12
                                                                              4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path

7. Click  under Drive surface.

8. Select the highlighted face.

The face is displayed in the geometry selected area.

Every surface has 2 directions. The outer direction and the inner direction.
Depending on which side of the part has to be machined you can select the
direction. However, if there is a solid model, then the outer direction is
automatically set.

9. Select the Show direction for selected faces checkbox to show the
direction.

10. Click

11. Set the Work type. The following options are available:
Around `X' Axis : The cuts must be normal to X Axis
Around `Y' Axis : The cuts must be normal to Y Axis
Around `Z' Axis : The cuts must be normal to Z Axis

12. In Around axis list, click X-Axis.

13. Select the Constant option.
The Type in the Area section, allows us to set how much area of the drive surface must be machined. Following three
options are available for the selected strategy (i.e. Parallel cuts):

Full, avoid cuts at exact edges:
This option creates a tool path for the entire surface. However, it avoids creating the tool path at the trimmed edges of
the surface. This is useful when we do not want to blunt/spoil an existing edge which is already machined or, when the
model is imported from another CAD system as the surfaces which are imported from other CAD system can have
imperfect trimmed edges. This can result in the tool paths having many jumps to the retract plane.
The value by which the tool path starts from inside the surface edge is
determined by the Maximum Step Over parameter in the Tool path Parameters
tab.

                                                                              13
Full, Start and end at exact surface edges:
This option creates a tool path from the exact edge (both start and end edges). In this option we can give a margin by
which the tool path will start from inside the surface edge. The value is to compensate for the inaccuracies in the trimmed
edge.
If you select Full, Start and end at exact surface edges, you see these options:
It is always a good practice to give an allowance which is either default (0.03mm) or
something close to it. Making the additional margins close to 0 creates unnecessary
jumps to the clearance plane because there are inaccuracies in the trimmed surface
edges.

Limit cuts by one or two points:
This option allows us to create a tool path on the surface using the following scenarios:
Selecting only the start point ends the tool path at that
point and from the start edge of the surface. The following
figure explains this scenario:

Selecting the second point ends the tool path at that point similar to what is explained in option 1.
Selecting both the points creates the tool path between the
two points. This option is very similar to defining an area
for machining. The only difference is that two points are
used to define the area.

14. In the Type list, click Full, avoid cuts at exact edges.
15. Click Tool > Select.

14
                                              4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path

16. Double click BALL NOSE MILL tool icon to
add it as the tool.

17. Click

The next step is to define the clearance area type and values for clearance definition. We will look at this step after
generating the tool path, as at that point, it will be much clearer.

18. Click Tool path parameters.
We will look at the following three main parameters which will be defined in this tool path:
i. Cut tolerance
ii. Distance
iii. Maximum Step Over/Scallop

Cut tolerance:

This parameter is the tolerance with which the toolpath is generated. This parameter is "Bi-tol" which means any value
defined as the tolerance is taken as +/-
Note that here the 5 Axis Simultaneous directly uses surfaces to perform the calculations. Unlike HSM which uses
intermediate mesh to do the calculations. A mesh is generally made up of triangles which is the simplest geometry to
calculate on. Therefore, if the surfaces are of good quality, even a slightly loose tolerance in the 5 Axis Simultaneous
gives a very high quality surface finish. Tightening the tolerance results in higher calculation times and more number of
points in the resultant Gcode file.

Distance:

This parameter is used to generate more number of points with equal spacing between them. Generally, InventorCAM
calculates points on a given surface based on tolerance. However, the number of points can sometimes be too less.
For example, on a surface which has extremely large curvature radius or on small surfaces which can lose out on detail
because of less number of points representing the surface. To overcome this, the distance parameter is used.

Points Generated on surface with a given tolerance
                                                                                                               15
                                       Points Generated on surface with a given tolerance and distance

Note that using the distance parameter increases the number of points appearing in the Gcode file in multiples. This
can sometimes slow down old machines as they do not have the processing power to read in the large number of points.
Therefore, this parameter must always be used judiciously.
Maximum step over:
This parameter is the maximum distance between two subsequent toolpath passes. Remember that if the distance is
"Maximum" it means at some areas the distance can also be lower than what is defined. Changing the maximum step over
influences the scallop value and vice versa.
Now, set the above explained values:
Cut tolerance. 0.02
Distance. Do not use this parameter now
Maximum step over. 3
Leave the rest of the parameters as default.
Let us now create and visualize our first 5 axis tool path.

19. Click
The tool path calculation in InventorCAM 5 Axis generally happens in the following three stages:
i. Creating cut sections on the drive surfaces
ii. Linking the cut sections based on sorting and links
iii. Checking for gouges and applying the gouge check reactions

20. Click
The Simulation window displays.

21. Click

16
                                                                 4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path

The calculated tool path should look as displayed in the image:

Let us run the machine simulation to understand some crucial problems in our current tool path. We will use DMU 100
Monoblock machine to simulate our tool path.
22. Click Machine Simulation.
This step does the following:
Creates the part & stock STL and loads into the simulation
Loads the tool path with tools & holders
Loads the machine from the machine sim folder
Depending on the number of tool paths and tolerance of the
part, it may take several minutes to start the machine simulation.
Note: Click OK to this window. This window appears as there is
no stock defined for this part.
23. Click
This is how the simulation looks like:

                                                                                                                                                      17
24. Click  in the Simulation window.

To understand what causes the gouge in the very first move of the part, we need to understand the Levels option in the
5 Axis Tool path Definition Box.

25. Click Levels.
Levels is the clearance plane. There are four types of levels
in InventorCAM 5 Axis.
i. Automatic
ii. Clearance to a Plane
iii. Clearance to an imaginary Cylinder
iv. Clearance to an imaginary Sphere

Automatic

This option is set as default. When this option is selected from the Type list, InventorCAM automatically determines the
clearance area type, position and dimension to maintain the most suitable clearance level.

Clearance to a Plane:

Using this option the retracts of the tool always take to the plane specified. The plane could be in either Automatic, X
Direction, Y Direction or, Z Direction. The plane can also be user defined using two points.

Clearance to an Imaginary Cylinder:

Using this option the retracts of the tool are taken to the nearest point on an imaginary cylinder. This cylinder can have
its axis running either through X axis, Y axis or, Z axis. The axis can also run through a user defined direction which can
be defined using two points in space. The other parameter that the user is allowed to define is the radius of this imaginary
cylinder.

This option is best suited for this part as this is rotating around X axis and the retracts must take place on the nearest
point on an imaginary cylinder.

Clearance to an Imaginary Sphere:

Using this option the retracts of the tool take place on an imaginary sphere. The radius and centre position of this sphere
is user defined.

This option is best suited for impeller kind of parts.

26. In the Type list, click Cylinder.

27. Define a Radius of 65 mm.

The part has a radius of 50 mm, therefore, we will have a constant clearance of 15 mm throughout. The axis of the
Cylinder will pass though X axis.

28. Select the Parallel to X option.

29. Click

18
                                                            4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path

30. Click
The Simulation window displays.

31. Click
You can see that the retracts look much better than before

32. Click Machine Simulation.
33. Click
We can see that the initial gouge is no longer there and also the retracts are much better and easy on the machine.
34. Click
We will now look at two more issues that must be fixed.
1. Leads and links for entry, exit and retracts.
2. Tilt angle to avoid cutting exactly at the tip of the
cutter.

                                                                                                                                                      19
We can see that the initial gouge is no longer there and also the retracts are much better and easy on the machine.
35. Click
We will now look at two more issues that must be fixed.
1. Leads and links for entry, exit and retracts.
2. Tilt angle to avoid cutting exactly at the tip of the cutter.
Leads & Links:
These are very important to allow the tool to enter and exit the material smoothly. As you can see in the below picture,
the tool is directly entering into the material, this can cause the tool to chip off or wear early.

Let us see some of the common leads and links used in this part.
The first leads are applied to the main entry and exit of the tool into and out of the part.
36. Click Link.
37. Click next to Use Lead-In.
The Lead-In window displays.
38. Clear the Use default Lead-In check box.
39. Enter the parameters as shown in the image.
40. Click OK.

20
                                                 4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path

41. Click next to Use Lead-Out.
The Lead-Out window displays.
42. Clear the Use default Lead-Out check box.
43. Enter the parameters as shown in the image.
44. Click OK.

45. Click the Links tab.
46. Enter the parameters as shown in the image.

47. Click Default Lead-In/Out.
48. Enter the parameters as shown in the image.
49. Click

                                                 21
50. Click
The Simulation window displays.
51. Click
The Lead-Ins and Lead-Outs look like this:

52. Click
We will now look at tool axis control which is the most important part in 5 Axis Machining. This is important as the tool
axis control defines the orientation of the tool axis during 5 Axis Machining. An improper tool axis control definition
can cause jerks on the machine and can also gouge into the part.
In our exercise we will use the tool axis control to effectively use the tool to cut the material and not grind/rub against
the material.
Observe the following images:

22
                                                                                                                4. Creating a 5-Axis Tool Path
In the above scenario, the tip of the tool is doing all the cutting. This is not the best method to cut as the tip of the tool
has "0" RPM. This creates a grinding/rubbing effect on the material and wears out the tool. The surface finish appears
jaded.
To make the tool cut, and not rub or grind, a small tilt angle must be applied so that we push the tip of the tool away from
the cutting area and use the point on the spherical part of the tool which has the "RPM" to cut the material.
Take a look at this image:

53. Click Tool axis control.
54. In the Tilt angle at side of cutting field, enter the value of 25.
55. Click
56. Click
The Simulation window displays.
57. Click Machine Simulation.
You can see that the tip is no longer cutting the part but
the side of the tool is cutting the material. Depending on
the diameter of the cutter and the machine kinematics,
this angle can either be increased or decreased to get
the desired results. This angle is more popularly applied
when Bull Nose Cutters are used.
58. Click

                                                                                                                                                      23
Tilt Angle is the angle of the tool axis across the tool path in the feed direction, while Lead/Lag angle is the angle of the
tool axis along the tool path in the feed direction.

Unlike tilt angle which physically tilts the tool, lead/lag angle in this machine produces a shift from the centre thereby
producing the same effect of a tilt angle (Pushing the tip of the tool away from the cutting area).

24
                                                                          The Complete CAM Solution, with
                                                                          Revolutionary iMachining, best support
                                                                          for Multi-Channel Mill-Turn and Swiss
                                                                          CNCs, seamlessly Integrated in and
                                                                          associative to SOLIDWORKS®, Inventor®
                                                                          and Solid Edge®.
                                                                          iMachining 2D
                                                                          iMachining 3D
                                                                          2.5D Milling
                                                                          Indexial Multi-Sided
                                                                          HSS Machining
                                                                          3D High Speed Milling
                                                                          Simultaneous 5-Axis
                                                                          Turning
                                                                          Advanced Mill-Turn
                                                                          Swiss-Type
                                                                          Solid Probe

solidcam.com
