Training Course | InventorCAM 2024

2.5D Milling

                                                iMachining 2D
                                                iMachining 3D
                                                2.5D Milling
                                                Indexial Multi-Sided
                                                HSS Machining
                                                3D High Speed Milling
                                                Simultaneous 5-Axis
                                                Turning
                                                Advanced Mill-Turn
                                                Swiss-Type
                                                Solid Probe
   InventorCAM 2024
Milling Training Course

       2.5D Milling

                          ©1995-2024 SolidCAM
                            All Rights Reserved.
          Contents

Contents

1. Introduction

   1.1 About this Course8
   1.2 Basic Concepts9
   1.3 Process Overview9

2. CAM-Part Definition

   Exercise #1: CAM-Part Definition 14

3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

   Exercise #2: Cover Machining 28
   Exercise #3: Cover Machining 60
   Exercise #4: Bracket Machining 107
   Exercise #5: Electronic Box Machining 109
   Exercise #6: Clamp Machining 112
   Exercise #7: Basic Part Machining 117
   Exercise #8: Cover Machining 120
   Exercise #9: Mounting Base Machining 123
   Exercise #10: Support Machining 129
   Exercise #11: Engraving 138

4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

   Exercise #12: Frame Machining 148
   Exercise #13: Mounting Machining 163

5. Indexial 5-Axis Milling

   Exercise #14: Clamp Machining 172

6. Toolbox

   Exercise #15: Standard Cycles Machining 183

7. Automatic Feature
Recognition

   Exercise #16: Pocket Recognition 195
   Exercise #17: Mounting Box Machining 200
   Exercise #18: Drill Recognition 201
   Exercise #19: Electronic Box Machining 215
   Exercise #20: Edge Deburring Recognition 217

Document number: IVCMTCENG0024SP1
                                                                                                                                                   v
vi
Introduction  1
1.1 About this Course

The goal of this course is to teach you how to use InventorCAM to machine various parts applying 2.5D Milling technologies.
This course covers the basic concepts of InventorCAM 2.5D machining and is a supplement to the system documentation
and online help. Once you have developed a good foundation in basic skills, you can refer to the online help for information
on the less frequently used options.

Course design

This course is designed around a task-based approach to training. With the guided exercises you will learn the commands and
options necessary to complete a machining task. The theoretical explanations are embedded into these exercises to give an
overview of the InventorCAM 2.5D Milling capabilities.

Using this training book

This training book is intended to be used both in a classroom environment under the guidance of an experienced instructor
and as self-study material. It contains a number of laboratory exercises to enable you to apply and practice the material
covered by the guided exercises. The laboratory exercises do not contain step-by-step instructions.

Training materials

The file archive supplied with this book contains copies of various files that are used throughout this course. The Exercises
folder contains the files that are required for guided and laboratory exercises. The Built Parts folder inside the Exercises
contains the completed CAM parts for each exercise. Unpack the complete Exercises folder on your computer. The Autodesk
Inventor files used for the exercises were prepared with Autodesk Inventor Professional 2024. Once you work on the given
exercises step-by-step, ensure that you save your completed CAM files in a different location to avoid overwriting the existing
completed CAM files.

Windows 10

The screenshots in this book were made using InventorCAM 2024 SP1 integrated with Autodesk Inventor Professional 2 024
running on Windows 10. If you are running on a different version of Windows, you may notice differences in the appearance
of the menus and windows. These differences do not affect the performance of the software.

Conventions used in this book

This book uses the following typographic conventions:

   Bold Sans Serif               This style is used to emphasize InventorCAM
   10. Define CoordSys Position  options, commands or basic concepts. For
                                 example, click the Change to opposite
     Explanation                 button.

                                 The mouse icon and numbered sans serif
                                 bold text indicate the beginning of the
                                 exercise action.

                                 This style combined with the lamp icon is
                                 used for the InventorCAM functionality
                                 explanations embedded into the guided
                                 exercises. The lamp icon is also used to
                                 emphasize notes.

8
                                                                                               1. Introduction

1.2 Basic Concepts

Every manufacturing project in InventorCAM contains the following data:

        CAM-Part ­ The CAM-Part defines the general data of the workpiece. This includes the model name, the coordinate
            system position, tool options, CNC-controller, etc.

        Geometry ­ By selecting Edges, Curves, Surfaces or Solids, define what and where you are going to machine. This
            geometry is associated with the native Autodesk Inventor model.

        Operation ­ An Operation is a single machining step in InventorCAM. Technology, Tool parameters and Strategies are
            defined in the Operation. In short, Operation means how you want to machine.

1.3 Process Overview

The major stages of the InventorCAM manufacturing project creation process are the following:

CAM-Part definition

      This stage includes the definition of the global parameters of the Manufacturing Project (CAM-Part). You have
      to define a number of Coordinate Systems that describe the positioning of the part on the CNC-machine.

      Optionally, you can define the Stock model and Target model to be used for the rest material calculation. The
      Stock model describes the initial state of the workpiece that has to be machined. The Target model describes
      the one that has to be reached after the machining. After every operation, InventorCAMcalculates how much
      material was actually removed from the CAM-Part and how much material remains unmachined (rest material).
      The rest material information enables InventorCAM to automatically optimize the tool path and avoid the air
      cutting.

Operations definition

      InventorCAM enables you to define a number of milling operations. During an operation definition you have to
      select the Geometry, choose the tool from the Part Tool Table (or define a new one), define a machining strategy
      and a number of technological parameters.

                                                                                                                9
10
CAM-Part Definition  2
 The CAM-Part definition process includes the following stages:
                                                           CAM-Part creation

                                                      CNC-controller definition

                                                   Coordinate system definition

                                                        Stock model definition

                                                       Target model defintion

          · CAM-Part creation. According to default settings, the CAM-Part name and location are defined automatically.
             However, you can define them manually, if you choose the manual option. At this stage, InventorCAM defines the
             necessary system files and a folder to allocate the place to store InventorCAM data.

          · CNC-controller definition. Choosing a CNC-controller is a necessary step. The controller type influences the
             Coordinate System definition and the Geometry definition.

          · Coordinate system definition. You have to define the Coordinate System ­ the origin for all machining operations
             of the CAM-Part.

          · Stock model definition. InventorCAM enables you to define the stock model that describes the initial state of the
             workpiece to be machined.

          · Target model definition. InventorCAM enables you to define the model of the part in its final state after the
             machining.

 The following exercises describe the full process of the CAM-Part definition. It is recommended to complete the stages in
 order to understand how the CAM-Part features are built. For this purpose, you have to turn off the automatic CAM-Part
 definition.
 Before you start, select CAM Settings command from InventorCAM 2024 ribbon.

 The InventorCAM Settings dialog box is displayed.
 In the left pane, select CAM-Part. Select the Auto select project location check box. In the left pane, select Automatic CAM-
 Part definition.

12
                                                                                                                               2. CAM-Part Definition
In the right pane, click the Milling tab and clear check boxes under the following sections: Definition of CNC-Controller,
Definition of CoordSys, Definition of Stock, and Definition of Target.

Then you have to turn off the default templates loading.
In the left pane, select Defaults > Template. In the right pane, under 2.5D Milling, clear all the check boxes next to the template
names.

Click OK to confirm your choice.
These settings can be turned back on at any time.

                                                                                                                                                              13
 Exercise #1: CAM-Part Definition

 This exercise illustrates the CAM-Part definition process in InventorCAM. In this
 exercise, you have to create the CAM-Part for the cover model displayed and define
 the Coordinate System, the Stock model and Target model that are necessary for
 the part machining. The CAM-Part will be used in the exercises further on.
 When you start to program a CAM-Part, you have to decide what workpiece you
 are going to use. This decision determines the number and the type of operations
 that are used to reach the final part shape.
 In this exercise, the box stock is used. The box dimensions include offsets from the actual model.

 At the next stage, you have to decide on what type of CNC-machine
 you are going to use (3-, 4- or 5-axis). In this exercise, a 3-axis CNC-
 machine is chosen for the machining. With a CNC-machine of this type,
 all the required faces of the cover part can be machined using a single
 positioning.

               1. Load the Autodesk Inventor model
               Load the E xercise1.iptmodel located in the Exercisesfolder.

               This model contains a number of features forming the solid body of the cover.
14
                                                                                  2. CAM-Part Definition

2. Start InventorCAM
 To activate InventorCAM, click the InventorCAM 2024 > New > Milling.

Thus, InventorCAM is started, and the Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.

3. Choose the CNC-Machine
 Select the CNC-machine controller. Click the arrow to display the list of post-processors installed on your system.
 In this exercise, use a 3-Axis CNC-machine. Choose the gMilling_3xfrom the CNC-Machine list.

4. Start the Coordinate System definition
 Click the CoordSys button in the Define area to define the Machine Coordinate System.

                  To complete the CAM-Part definition, you need to define the Machine Coordinate System. The
                  Machine Coordinate System defines the origin for all machining operations of the CAM-Part. It
                  corresponds with the built-in controller functions.
                  You can define the Coordinate System origin position and axes orientation by selecting model
                  faces, vertices, edges, or Autodesk Inventor Coordinate Systems. The geometry for the machining
                  can also be defined directly on the solid model.

                      Coordinate
                      System

                             ZY
                                     X

                                                                                                                                                15
    The Z-direction of the Machine Coordinate System is parallel to the revolution axis of the tool.

                   ZY
    Machine

    Coordinate

    System          X

    In InventorCAM, the tool approaches from the positive direction of the Z-axis (like on a vertical
    CNC-machine).

       Z

    Y       X           Y
                                X
            Coordinate
                                 Coordinate
            System
                                 System

                             Z

    For 3-Axis CNC milling machines, each Machine Coordinate System means separate clamping. If
    you need to machine the part from different sides, use several Machine Coordinate Systems with
    the Z-axis oriented normally to the machined sides.

    In this exercise, it is enough to define one Machine Coordinate                 Z
    System with the Z-axis oriented upwards.
                                                                                 Y     X
    Such coordinate system enables you to machine the part with
    a single clamping.                                                              Coordinate
                                                                                    System

    The CoordSys dialog box enables you to define the Coordinate System
    location and the orientation of the axes.

    InventorCAM enables you to define the CoordSys using the following methods:

    Select assoc face

    This method enables you to define a coordinate system by selecting a face
    that remains associative to the model in case the model is later updated.

    Select face

    This method enables you to define a new CoordSys by selecting a
    face. The face can be planar or cylindrical/conical. For planar faces,
    I nventorCAM defines CoordSys with the Z-axis normal to the face. For
    cylindrical or conical faces, the Z-axis of the CoordSys is coincident with
    the axis of revolution of the specified cylindrical/conical surface.

16
                                                                                                                  2. CAM-Part Definition
                       Define
                  This method enables you to define the Coordinate System by selecting points. You have to define
                  the origin and the direction of the X- and Y-axes.
                       Select Coordinate System
                  This method enables you to choose the Autodesk Inventor Coordinate System defined in the
                  design model file as the CoordSys. The CoordSys origin and axes orientation are the same as those
                  of the original Autodesk Inventor Coordinate System.
                  I nventorCAM keeps the CAM coordinate system associative with the chosen CAD coordinate
                  system. This means that any change made to the CAD coordinate system automatically updates
                  the CAM coordinate system.

                       Normal to current view

                  This option enables you to define the Coordinate System with the Z-axis normal to the model view
                  you are facing on your screen. The CoordSys origin will lie in the origin of the Autodesk Inventor
                  Coordinate System, and the Z-axis will be directed normally to the chosen view of the model.

                       By 3 points (associative)

                  This option enables you to define the Coordinate System by selecting any three points.

5. Select the model face
 Choose the Top corner of model box option from the Place
 Coordsys origin to list.
 With the Select face method chosen, click on the model face
 as shown.
 The CoordSys origin is automatically defined in the top corner
 of the model box. The Z-axis of the CoordSys is normal to the
 selected face.

                Model box
                  InventorCAM calculates the box surrounding the model. The upper plane of the model box is
                  parallel to the XY-plane of the defined CoordSys.
                  The CoordSys is located in the corner of the model box.

                         Coordinate
                         System

                               ZY
                                       X

 Confirm by clicking  . The Coordinate System is defined.

                                                                                                                                                17
    The CoordSys Data dialog box is displayed.

    6. CoordSys Data

     This dialog box enables you to define the machining levels such as Tool start level, Clearance level, Part Upper
     level, etc.

                    CoordSys Data dialog box

                      The Machine CoordSys Number (MAC Number) defines the number of the Coordinate System in
                      the CNC-machine. The default value is 1. If you use another number, the GCode file contains the
                      G-function that prompts the machine to use the specified number stored in the machine controller
                      of your machine.

                      The Position field defines the sequential number of the CoordSys.

                      The Create planar surface at Part Lower level option enables you to generate a transparent planar
                      surface at the minimal Z-level of the part so that its lower level plane is visible.

                      The Edit Coordsys button enables you to change the CoordSys location or orientation of the axes
                      with the CoordSys dialog box.

                      This planar surface provides you the possibility to select points that do not lie on the model entities.
                      It is suppressed by default and not visible until you unsuppress it in the Model elementstree.

                      The Planar and Rear Levels sections contain sets of facial machining levels describing the planes
                      parallel to the XY-plane and located along the Z-axis.

                      The Levels: Planar section displays levels for milling from the positive Z-direction.

                      The Levels: Radial section contains a set of machining levels describing the virtual cylinders
                      situated around the Z-axis.

                      The Levels: Rear section displays levels for milling from the negative Z-direction. The negative
                      Z-direction can be used in case of milling of the part from the back side with the same Coordinate
                      System in the main spindle or in case of using the back spindle.

                      These sections contain the following parameters:

                      The Tool start level defines the Z-level at which the tool starts working.

                      The Clearance level is the Z-level to which the tool moves rapidly from one operation to another
                          (in case the tool does not change).

                      The Part Upper level defines the height of the upper surface of the part to be milled.

                      The Part Lower level defines the lower surface level of the part to be milled.

    Tool start  Rapid movements area            Part Upper
    level       Feed movements area             level

    Clearance                                   Part Lower
    level                                       level

18
                                                                                                                  2. CAM-Part Definition
                  The Tool Z-level parameter defines the height to which the tool moves before the rotation of the

                      4/5 axes to avoid collision between the tool and the workpiece. This level is related to the
                      CoordSys position and you have to check if it is not over the limit switch of the machine.
                      It is highly recommended to send the tool to the reference point or to a point related to the
                      reference point.
                  In the delta fields of all the Planar Levels the associative values can be set for the face you select.
                  In the Translation Data section, Shift is the distance along each axis (X, Y, Z) from the Machine
                  Coordinate System to the location of the Position in the coordinate system and the orientation of
                  the Machine Coordinate System.
                  Rotation is the angle of rotation around the main axes X, Y and Z.
                  The Plane box defines the default work plane for the operations using this CoordSys, as it is output
                  to the GCode program. In the InventorCAM CAM module, you must always work on the XY-
                  plane. Some CNC-machines, however, have different axes definitions and require a GCode output
                  with rotated XY-planes.

 Confirm the CoordSys Data dialog box by clicking  .
 The CoordSys Manager dialog box is displayed. This dialog box displays the Machine
 CoordSys.

 Confirm the CoordSys Manager dialog box with  .
 The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed again.

7. Define the Stock model
 For each Milling project, you can define the Stock model, which is the workpiece that is placed on the machine
 before you start machining the CAM-Part.
 Click the Stock button in the Define section of the Milling Part Data dialog box.

 The Stock dialog box is displayed.
 This dialog box enables you to choose the mode of the Stock model definition.

                Stock Model Definition Modes
                  Box ­ in this mode InventorCAM automatically determines the box
                      surrounding the model.
                  Extruded boundary ­ this mode enables you to define the 2D stock
                      geometry by selecting a chain of geometrical elements (lines, arcs,
                      splines, edges, etc.).
                  3D Model ­ this mode enables you to define the stock model via 3D
                      model selection.

                                                                                                                                                19
                                Cylinder ­ this mode enables you to define the stock model as a cylinder (or a tube) surrounding
                                    the selected solid model.

                                STL ­ this mode enables you to define the stock model based on a STL file that exists in your
                                    system. When you choose this mode, the STL file section becomes available. By clicking the
                                    Browse button, you can choose the STL file for the stock definition.

               Choose the Box mode from the Defined by list. The appearing parameters enable you to select a solid body for
               the surrounding box calculation.
               Optionally, offsets from the model can be defined. In this exercise, define the stock model offsets as follows:
               · For the X+, X-, Y+ and Y- offsets, use the values of 2
               · For the Z+ offset, set the value to 0.25
               · For the Z- offset, set the value to 5
               Click on the solid body. It is highlighted.

               InventorCAM automatically generates the surrounding box.
               Confirm the Stock model definition by clicking  . The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.
               8. Define the Target model
               InventorCAM enables you to define the Target model, which is the final shape
               of the CAM-Part after the machining. The program uses the Target model for
               gouge checking in the SolidVerify simulation.
               Click the Target button in the Define area of the Milling Part Data dialog box.
               The Target dialog box is displayed.

20
                                                                                                                  2. CAM-Part Definition
 Click on the solid body to choose the target. The solid body is highlighted, and the Solid 1 icon appears in the
 Selection section. The target model is defined.

 Confirm the Target dialog box with  .
 The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.
9. Save the CAM-Part data
 Confirm the Milling Part Data dialog box by clicking  .
 The Milling Part Data dialog box is closed, and the InventorCAM Manager is displayed. The defined CAM-Part is
 saved.
 At this stage, the definition of the CAM-Part is finished. The definition of Milling operations is covered in the
 following exercise using this CAM-Part.

                  The InventorCAM Manager tree is the main interface feature of InventorCAM that displays
                  complete information about the CAM-Part.
                  The InventorCAM Manager tree contains the following elements:

                       · CAM-Part header

                      This header displays the name of the current CAM-Part. By right-clicking it, you can display
                      the menu to manage your CAM-Parts.
                      The Machine subheader is located under the CAM-Part header. Double-click this subheader to
                      review your machine configuration and parameters.
                      The CoordSys Manager subheader is located under the CAM-Part header. Double-click this
                      subheader to display the CoordSys Manager dialog box that enables you to manage your
                      Coordinate Systems.

                                                                                                                                                21
                                    The Stock and Target subheaders are located under the CAM-Part header. Double-click these
                                    subheaders to load the Stock/Target dialog boxes that enable you to change the definition of
                                    the Stock/Target models.
                                    The Updated stock subheader is located under the Target header. Right-click this subheader to
                                    display the menu that enables you to calculate the updated stock and rest material.
                                    The Settings subheader is also located under the CAM-Part header. Double-click this subheader
                                    to load the Part Settings dialog box that enables you to edit the settings defined for the current
                                    CAM-Part.

                                        · Tool header

                                    This header displays the name of the current Tool Library. Double-click this header to display
                                    the Part Tool Table, which is the list of tools available to use in the current CAM-Part.

                                        · Machining Process header

                                    This header displays the name of the current Machining Process table.

                                        · Hole Wizard Process header

                                    This header can recognise and process the holes created with Autodesk Hole Wizard feature
                                    and perform machining of the holes automatically.

                                        · Geometries header

                                    This header displays all InventorCAM geometries that are not used in the operations.

                                        · Fixtures header

                                    This header displays available fixtures. By right-clicking it, you can display the menu to define
                                    and manage your fixtures.

                                        · Operations header

                                    This header displays all InventorCAM operations and setups defined for the current CAM-Part.

                                        · Setup header

                                    This header displays all InventorCAM operations defined for the current setup.

               10. Close the CAM-Part
               Right-click the CAM-Part header in the InventorCAM Manager tree and choose Close from the menu.
               The CAM-Part is closed.

22
InventorCAM 2.5D  3
     Operations
InventorCAM offers you the following types of 2.5D Milling operations:

                                                                   2.5D Milling Operations

    Face Milling                Slot
       Pro le                  T-Slot
                        Translated Surface
    Contour 3D

    Thread Milling             ToolBox Cycles
       Engraving        Edge Deburring Recognition

            Pocket             Drilling
    Pocket Recognition  Multi-depth Drilling
                        Drill Recognition

In InventorCAM, an operation is a single machining step. A workpiece is usually manufactured using several machining steps
and technologies. For each of these steps you can define a separate operation. An operation can be very complex, but it always
uses one tool, one major geometry and executes one machining type, e.g. Profile Milling or Drilling. You can edit any single
machining operation, change the operation sequence and generate the GCode, combining and splitting the operation list of
your CAM-Part.

The Machining Geometry has to be defined for each operation. The Geometry prompts InventorCAM what and where you
want to machine.

   · A Geometry for Profile, Pocket, Contour 3D, Slot and T-Slot operations, Engraving and ToolBox cycles consists of
       a number of chains. Chain geometries are defined by selecting the following entities: edges of models, 2D curves,
       3D curves, circles, lines and splines. Each chain is composed of one or more entities and defines an open or closed
       contour.

   · A Geometry for Face Milling operations can be defined by selecting solid models, faces or chains of model elements.

   · A Geometry for Drilling and Thread Milling operations consists of one or more points (drilling centers) that can be
       defined by a number of methods directly on the solid model.

   · A Geometry for Drill Recognition, Pocket Recognition, and Edge Deburring Recognition operations is determined
       automatically by InventorCAM Automatic Feature Recognition functionality.

Face Milling Operation

This operation enables you to machine large flat surfaces with face mill tools.

24
                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Profile Operation

You can mill on or along a contour. The profile geometry can be open or closed. In profile
milling you can optionally use tool radius compensation to the right or to the left side of
the geometry. InventorCAM offers two types of profiling:

   · Milling a single profile to the specified constant or variable depth in one step or in
       several user-defined down steps.

   · Concentric profiles to the specified constant or variable depth; this type of profiling
       generates several concentric profiles that start from the defined clear offset distance
       from the profile, and finish on the profile geometry, thus clearing the area around
       the profile to a constant depth.

Contour 3D Operation

This operation enables you to utilize the power of the 3D Engraving technology for
the 3D contour machining. In this operation, InventorCAM enables you to prevent the
gouging between the tool and the 3D contour.

Pocket Operation

In pocket milling, you have to remove material from the interior of a closed geometry.
I nventorCAM offers two types of pocketing:

   · When a profile geometry consists of one or more profiles and none of them are
       enclosed or intersect with one another, each is milled as a separate pocket without
       islands.

   · When a profile geometry consists of several profiles, any profile that is enclosed or
       intersects with another profile is treated as an island. You can define an unlimited
       number of islands within a single pocket.

Drilling Operation

This operation enables you to perform drills and other canned drill cycles. InventorCAM
supports the canned drill cycles provided by your particular CNC-machine such as
threading, peck, ream, boring, etc. If your CNC-machine has no canned drill cycles of its
own, they can be defined using the VMID Editor. In the Technology list, you can choose
the option of Thread milling to save and copy a drilling operation and then change the
operation to a thread mill operation.

In the Technology list, select either a 2D Drill, 3D Drill, Thread Milling or Multi-depth
Drilling option. The dialog box parameters are changed according to your selection.

When a Drilling Operation is opened and Thread Milling is selected under Technology, all the Drilling Operations are saved
and copied into the new Thread Milling operation. However, you must re-select the tool for this new Thread Milling operation.

Multi-depth Drilling

Multi-depth drilling is very useful for deep hole drilling and drilling through cross holes. In this operation,
you have full control of Drilling operations at every depth. The Multi-depth drilling operation enables
you to define manually the areas where the feed rate changes. You can manually control the Spin rate/
direction and coolant control during the retract and engage movements.

In the Technology list, select either a 2D Drill, 3D Drill, Thread Milling or Multi-depth Drilling option.
The dialog box parameters are changed according to your selection.

                                                                                                                                                              25
 When a Drilling Operation is opened and Thread Milling is selected under Technology, all the Drilling Operations are saved
 and copied into the new Thread Milling operation. However, you must re-select the tool for this new Thread Milling operation.
 Thread Milling Operation
 This operation enables you to generate a helical tool path for the machining of internal and
 external threads with thread mills.
 In the Technology list, select either a 2D Drill, 3D Drill, Thread Milling or Multi-depth Drilling
 option. The dialog box parameters are changed according to your selection.
 When a Thread Milling Operation is opened and one of the Drilling operations is selected under Technology, all the Thread
 Milling Operations are saved and copied into the new Drilling operation. However, you must re-select the tool for this new
 Drilling operation.

 Slot Operation
 This operation generates a tool path along the center line to the right or to the left of one
 or more profiles. Two types of slots can be defined: the Slot with constant depth operation
 machines the slot in several steps until the final depth is reached. In Slot with variable depth,
 the depth profile is also defined by a 2D section. The slot can be pre-machined using rough
 and semi-finish cycles. The finish cut produces a tool path according to the specified scallop
 height on the floor of the slot.
 With available parameters for the right and left extension and the side step, you can mill a slot
 wider than the tool diameter. All slot technologies in Toolbox Cycles operations are enabled
 to use Pre-Drill operations.
 T-Slot Operation
 This operation enables you to machine slots in vertical walls with a slot mill tool.

 Translated Surface
 This operation enables you to generate translated surface by moving a section along a profile
 geometry. Limit geometries can be projected on the translated surface. You can machine the
 resulting translated surface inside, outside or along the limit geometry.

 ToolBox Cycles
 This operation enables you to choose a machining scenario intended for a specific machining
 case from a set of pre-defined 2.5D Milling operations.

26
           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Engraving

This operation enables you to mill text or any other profile on a 2D or 3D geometry. Both
2D and 3D Engraving strategies are available.

Pocket Recognition

This operation recognizes automatically pocket features at the target model and creates the
necessary machining.

Drill Recognition
This operation carries out a highly efficient drill recognition and geometry creation with
the functionality of the AFRM-module (Automatic Feature Recognition and Machining).
In this operation drilling on different levels can be carried out. The drilling levels are
automatically recognized, but may be edited by the user.

Edge Deburring Recognition
This operation recognizes automatically chamfer features at the target model and creates the
necessary machining.

                                                                                              27
Exercise #2: Cover Machining

In this exercise, you use the CAM-Part defined in the Exercise #1. You have to define
several 2.5D operations in order to machine the model external faces, pocket and holes
in the corners.
In the process of definition of operations, you have to define the machining geometry,
the tool and several technological parameters.

             1. Open the CAM-Part
              In the main menu, choose InventorCAM 2024 and click Open .
              In the browser window, choose Exercise1 ­ the CAM-Part prepared in the previous exercise.
              The CAM-Part is loaded.

             2. Add a Face Milling operation
              In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Operations header and choose Face from the Add Milling Operation
              submenu.
              The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.
              In this operation, the upper face is machined.

28
                                                          3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

3. Define the Face Milling geometry

Face Milling Geometry can be defined in two ways:

· Face Milling geometry can be based on the actual Updated Stock boundary thereby
   assuring full coverage of the stock face at any stage of machining.

· The traditional way of defining Geometry.

You can set the Geometry to Stock based boundary or Part based boundary as default in
the InventorCAM settings.

Stock Based boundary ­ The Geometry is based on the existing updated stock. The
Geometry field is disabled and named as Updated Stock by default.

Part based boundary ­ This section enables you to choose the appropriate Coordinate
System and to define the Machining Geometry for the operation.

Click Part based boundary and then click .

The Face Milling Geometry dialog box is displayed.

The Type section enables you to define the face milling geometry using the following methods:

             · Model

   This option generates a rectangle located at the XY-
   plane and surrounding the Target model and selects
   it for the Face Milling geometry. The rectangle chain
   is displayed in the Chain List section.

· Faces

This option enables you to define the Face Milling

geometry by face selection. The Define button and

the related box enable you either to define a new                                      Face Milling geometry

faces geometry with the Select Faces dialog box or

choose an already defined geometry from the list. When the model faces are selected,

I nventorCAM generates a number of chains surrounding the selected faces. These chains are

displayed in the Chain List section.

Selected faces

                                     Face Milling geometry

                                                                                                                        29
    · Profile                                                                           Face Milling geometry

       This option enables you to define the Face Milling
       geometry by a profile. The Define button and the
       related box enable you either to define a new profile
       geometry with the Geometry Edit dialog box or
       choose an already defined geometry from the list.
       The defined chains are displayed in the Chain List
       section.

    In the Type section, use the default Model option for the Face Milling geometry definition. Click
    the Define button in Base Geometry section. The 3D Geometry dialog box is displayed.

    This dialog box enables you to define the 3D Model geometry:

    The CAD selection button enables you to select the 3D geometry with
    A utodesk Inventor tools.

    You can select an object by clicking on it. When an object is selected, its
    icon is displayed in the list in the bottom of the dialog box. To unselect the
    object, click on it again or right-click its icon in the list of selected elements
    and choose Unselect from the menu.

    To remove selection from all objects in the list, click Unselect all.

     Click on the solid model to select it. The model is highlighted, and its icon
     appears in the list.

     Confirm the 3D Geometry dialog box by clicking  . The Face Milling
     Geometry dialog box is displayed again.
     The rectangle is generated surrounding the target model at the XY-plane.

     Confirm the Face Milling Geometry dialog box by clicking  .
     The geometry is defined for the operation.

    4. Define the Tool
     Switch to the Tool page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box. Start the tool definition by clicking the Select
     button.

30
                                                         3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

The TOOLKIT dialog box is displayed.

                 The Library Toolbar contains all tools available for use to machine a specific CAM-Part. This
                 dialog box enables you to add, import, and manage the tool items to the Part Tool Library of your
                 CAM-Part.

Currently, the Part Tool Table is empty. Define a new tool suitable for face milling. The available tools are displayed
in the Library Selection Pane.

This pane enables you to add a new tool to the tool library choosing from the tools available for the current
operation. In this operation, a face mill of Ø100 will be used.

Face mill                                                Arbor Diameter                   Total Length

This tool type is used for machining of large  Shoulder                          Outside
flat surfaces. A tool of this type is defined   Length                            Holder
with the parameters shown in the image.                                           Length

                                               Cutting       Taper
                                               Length        Angle

                                                         Tip Diameter
                                                           Diameter

Double click on the Face mill tool icon. A new Face mill is added in the Data Pane.

When a new tool
is added, the Data
Pane is populated
with the default
parameters of the
tool. The below
image explains the
right hand side of
the TOOLKIT
dialog box.

                                                                                          31
From the Data Toolbar, select the Topology data  icon.

In the Tool parameters section, edit the following parameters:

· Set the Diameter to 100

· Set the Shoulder diameter to 80

· Set the Arbor diameter to 80

Ensure the other parameters are also the same as shown in the below image.

Click to confirm the tool parameters and choose the tool for the operation.

5. Define the Face depth

 Switch to the Levels page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box.
 Click the Face depth button in the Milling levels area. This button
 enables you to define the Operation Lower level directly on the
 solid model. The depth is calculated automatically as the difference
 between the Z-values of the Operation Upper and Lower levels.

 The Pick Lower level dialog box is displayed.

 Select the model face as shown.

               The lower level value (0) is determined and displayed in the Pick Lower level dialog box.
               Confirm this dialog box with 
               The Face depth value is displayed in the Milling levels area. The green background of the edit box means that the
               parameter is associative to the model. Associativity enables the selected level to be synchronized with the solid
               model changes; InventorCAM automatically updates the CAM data when the model is modified.
               6. Define the technological parameters
               Switch to the Technology page of the Face Milling Operation dialog
               box. In the Technology section, choose the One Pass option.

32
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

                One Pass machining technology
                  InventorCAM performs the face milling in one pass. The direction
                  and location of the pass are calculated automatically according to
                  the face geometry, in order to generate an optimal tool movement
                  with the tool covering the whole geometry.
                  Selecting the One Pass option automatically opens the One pass
                  tab that enables you to define the machining parameters.

                  The Tool path modifications section enables you to define the
                  angle between the tool path and the geometry, and the shift from
                  the central line. The User-defined angle option enables you to
                  determine the angle of the tool path. Enter the value of angle in
                  the Absolute angle edit box.
                  When the option of Automatic optimal angle is selected,
                  I nventorCAM automatically calculates the optimal angle of
                  hatching to expedite the machining process. The tool path always
                  follows the length of the face no matter what angle the machined surface is facing.
                  Using the Automatic optimal angle option, you can change the angle by entering a different value
                  in the Delta from text field.
                  The Shift from center option shifts the generated tool path from the center of part by the specified
                  distance.
                  The Extension section enables you to define the tool path
                  extension over the face edges. The extension can be defined either
                  by percentage of the tool diameter (the % of tool diameter option)
                  or by value (the Value option).
 Use the One pass option with default parameters.

7. Save and Calculate
 Click .
 The Face Milling operation data is saved, and the tool path is
 calculated.
 The preview of the calculated tool path is displayed on the solid
 model.

                                                                                                                                                33
    8. Simulate

    Click  in the Face Milling Operation dialog box. The Simulation control panel is displayed.

    Switch to the SolidVerify page and clear the Single color check box. This option enables you to display all
    tool paths in one color, regardless of the chosen tool color. By clearing it, you can display tool paths in colors
    according to the tool color. Start the simulation with Play icon.

         The solid stock model defined in Exercise #1 is used in the SolidVerify simulation mode. During the
          machining simulation process, InventorCAM subtracts the tool movements (using solid Boolean operations)
          from the solid model of the stock. The remaining machined stock is a solid model that can be dynamically
         zoomed or rotated. It can also be compared to the target model in order to show the rest material.

         During the simulation, you can rotate , move , or zoom the model. Use these options to see the
         machining area in details.

         The Single step mode can be used to simulate the next tool movement by clicking or by using the space
         bar on your keyboard.

    Close the simulation.The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.
    Close this dialog box with .

    Click the check box next to the defined Face Milling Operation to hide
    the preview of the tool path.

    9. Add an operation

     Right-click the Operations header in InventorCAM Manager and choose Profile from
     the Add Milling Operation submenu.
     The Profile Operation dialog box is displayed.
     In this operation, the external profile is machined.

    10. Define the Geometry

     The first step of definition of each operation is the Geometry selection. At this
     stage, you have to define the Geometry for the Profile operation using the solid
     model geometry.

    Click  in the Geometry page of the Profile Operation dialog box.

    The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to add and
    edit geometry chain. When this dialogue box is displayed, you can select solid model
    entities for the Geometry definition.

34
                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Chain Selection Options

You can define the geometry by selecting edges, sketch segments and points
on the contour. The following options are available:

    Curve

   This option enables you to create a continuous geometry chain by
   choosing its successive entities automatically or manually

   If none of the additional options (Up to Entity, Tangent propagation,
   Constant Z Propagation) is selected, you can choose the chain entities
   manually one by one.

Associativity: InventorCAM keeps the associativity to any edge or sketch entity. Any change made
to the model or sketch automatically updates the selected geometry.

Smart Face

When you select the Smart Face check box, it allows you to pick a geometry directly from the face
that automatically recognizes all open edges, holes, bosses or semi-open pockets or a completely
open pocket. The option of Smart face is not checked by default. When any of the option of
Filter for circle/arc selection is used, Smart face remains unchecked and is disabled. When Smart
face is checked, you can pick the face and sync works on that entire face. However, if a filter is
used selecting Smart face, Smart face option automatically unchecks and disables. If Smart face
is used and you want to delete a hole that was picked using Smart face, a message pops up saying
"Uncheck Smart face to delete holes". The moment you delete holes, Smart face is again disabled.
You can enable Smart face again if all holes are removed.

Up to Entity

With this option, the chain is selected by specifying the start curve, the direction of the chain and
the element up to which the chain is created. InventorCAM enables you to choose any model edge,
vertex or sketch entity to determine the chain end.

                                                      End entity

Start entity  Selected chain

When the end item is chosen, InventorCAM determines the chain according to the rules of the
chosen selection mode (Tangent propagation and/or Constant Z Propagation). The chain selection
is terminated when the selected end item is reached.

If the chosen end item cannot be reached by the chain flow, the chain definition is terminated
when the start chain segment is reached. The chain is automatically closed.

                                                        End entity

Start entity  Selected chain

                              35
                                The confirmation message is displayed.

                                                   The Up to Entity option is useful if you do not want to define a closed chain, but
                                                   an open chain up to a certain element.

                                        Tangent propagation

                                InventorCAM automatically selects the next entity tangent to the current one. If there is no any, it
                                highlights all entities connected to the last chain entity. You have to select the entity along which
                                you want the chain to continue.

                                        Constant Z Propagation

                                This option identifies only entities on the same XY-plane with the previously selected chain entity.
                                You are only prompted to identify the next chain element when two entities on the same Z-level
                                are connected to the chain.
                                The system tolerance for this option can be set in
                                the InventorCAM Settings.

                                You are required to enter a positive and negative Z-deviation into the Delta Z Tolerance edit boxes.
                                Only entities within this range are identified as the next possible entity of the chain.

                                    1. Pick start curve - select the start entity of the chain.
                                    2. Pick point in chain direction - indicate the chain direction by choosing a point on the

                                        selected start entity of the chain.
                                    3. You are prompted to select one of the possible curves if the system detects that more than

                                        one entity can be the next element of the chain. Indicate your choice.
                                    4. When the system can close the chain, the confirmation message is displayed.
                                Click Yes to accept. If you answer No, you can continue the chain selection: for example, undo the
                                last step or cancel the chain selection.
                                The combination of Constant Z and Tangent Propagation options enables you to choose entities
                                which continue the chain with either tangent or having the same Z-level entities.

36
                       3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Curve + Close corners

This option enables you to close the gaps between successive chain
entities irrespective of the Gap minimum and Gap maximum values
(defined in the Defaults > Geometry section of InventorCAM Settings)
by virtually extending the entities up to their intersection.

Splines and arcs are extended by lines tangential to the arc/spline at its
end point.

Associativity: When the model used for the geometry definition is modified, InventorCAM
enables you to synchronize the geometry with the updated model. During the synchronization, the
program determines gap areas created using the Curve + Close Corners option and regenerates the
extension of the chain elements so as to close the gaps.

Loop

This option enables you to select a loop by picking one of the model edges.

                                                  Loop #2

    Loop #1

   1. Pick an edge shared by two model faces. Two faces to which this edge belongs are determined,
       and their loops are highlighted. The first determined loop is considered to be the primary
       and is highlighted with yellow color. The second loop is considered to be the secondary and
       is highlighted with blue color.

   2. Choose one of the loops. Click on any other edge forming the face. You are prompted to
       accept the chain that is now highlighted with yellow color. Accept the chain with the Yes
       button. A closed geometry chain is defined on this loop, and the secondary loop is rejected.

Associativity: InventorCAM keeps the associativity to any edge or sketch entity. Any change made
to the model or sketch automatically updates the selected geometry.

Point to point

This option enables you to connect specified points with a straight line.

                                                                            37
    Associativity: InventorCAM does not keep the associativity to any selected point. The program
    saves the X-, Y- and Z-coordinates of the selected points. Any change made to the model or sketch
    does not update the selected geometry.

                      You cannot select a point that is not located on a Autodesk Inventor entity (if you
                      need to select such a point, add a planar surface under the model and select the
                      points on that surface).

    The following rules apply to the virtual line selection using the Point to point option:

    · When you select a virtual line between two edges, the linebehaves as a spring. Whenever the
       model is changed and synchronized, the geometry is updated with the model.

    · When you select a sequence of several virtual lines, only the points connected to model
       edges or sketch elements are updated, but all other points stay fixed at the defined X-, Y- and
       Z-positions.

    Arc by points

    This option enables you to create a chain segment on an arc up to a specific point on the arc.

    Second  Third
    point   point

    First
    point

    Associativity: InventorCAM does not keep the associativity to any selected arcs by points.
    I nventorCAM saves the X-, Y- and Z-coordinates of the selected points. Any change made to the
    model or sketch does not update the selected geometry.

    In this exercise, the geometry must be defined as shown.
    The red arrow indicates the direction of the geometry.

    In InventorCAM operations, the direction of the chain
    geometry is used for the tool path calculation.

    In Profile milling, the tool moves in the direction of the                                             Tool revolution
                                                                                                           direction
    geometry by default. In this exercise, the combination of the
                                                                                            Tool movement
    geometry direction and the clockwise direction of         the tool                      direction

    revolution enables you to perform climb milling.

    When you pick the first chain entity on the solid model,                                Geometry
    I nventorCAM determines the start point of the picked entity                            direction
    closest to the picked position. The direction of the picked first
    chain entity is defined automatically from the start point to the
    picked position.

                                           Starting point
                                                          Direction
                                                                    Picked position

                                                                            Geometry chain

38
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 Choose the Loop option in the Single entitiessection and click on the model edge as shown.

       Notice that the picked position must be close to the start point of the geometry.
      Two faces shared by the selected edge are determined, and their loops are highlighted. The ar row indicates
      the direction of the selected chain.

 The confirmation message is displayed. Confirm it with Yes.
 The chain icon is displayed in the Chain List section.
 At this stage, the Geometry is defined. Confirm the Geometry selection with  . The Profile Operation dialog
 box is displayed.
11. Define the Tool
 At this stage, you have to define the tool for the Profile milling.
 Switch to the Tool page of the Profile Operation dialog box and click the Select button.
 The Part Tool Table with the tool used in the previous operation is displayed.
 In this Profile operation, an End mill of Ø16 will be used.

                End Mill/Bull Nose Mill/Ball Nose Mill
                  These tool types are used for the definition of rough/finish mills. The tool shapes and basic
                  parameters are shown below:

                                                                                                                                                39
Double click the End Mill tool to choose it for the operation.

From the Data Toolbar, select the Topology data      icon. In the Tool parameters section, set the Diameter
value to 16.

Set all the other parameters as shown in the image.

               Click to confirm the tool parameters and choose the tool for the operation.

               12. Define the Feed and Spin parameters

               Switch to the Data tab in the Tool section of the Profile Operation dialog box.
               Set the Spin rate (used in rough milling) value to 6000. The Spin finish (used in finish milling) value is automatically
               set to 6000.

                                The Spin finish check box enables you to optionally define different values for Spin rate and Spin
                                finish. When this check box is selected, the corresponding edit box is available so that you can edit
                                its value. When this check box is not selected, the specified Spin rate value is used for both rough
                                and finish machining.

               Set the Feed XY (feed rate for XY movements) to 1500 and the Feed Z (feed rate for Z movements) to 250. Select
               the check box near the Feed finish (feed rate for finish milling) parameter and set the value to 1800.

                                The Feed finish check box enables you to optionally define different values for Feed XY and Feed
                                finish. When this check box is selected, the corresponding edit box is available so that you can edit
                                its value. When this check box is not selected, the specified Feed XY value is used for both rough
                                and finish machining.

               13. Define the Milling levels

               Switch to the Levels page of the Profile Operation dialog box.
               InventorCAM enables you to define the milling levels using the solid model data.
               InventorCAM supports the machining of geometries with different depths in a single operation. This option is
               available for Profile, Contour 3D, Pocket, Slot and T-Slot operations.
               Choosing the Constant icon in the Milling levels section, enables you to set the Upper level, Lower level and Step
               down values.
40
                                                                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Choosing the Variable icon displays the Variable levels button. Clicking Variable levels displays the Levels dialog
box.

The Variable levels option can help simplify the task of programming, especially when you want to use the same
tool to perform the machining of many geometries having different depths. Such a task can now be achieved in
just one operation.

Upper level

This parameter defines the Z-level at which the machining starts.
To define the upper level, you can select the options of By stock,
By target or User defined from the list.

                                                                                Coord. System

Profile depth                                                                   ZX

                                                                             Y

                                                                    Upper

This parameter defines the Z-level below which the tool does not    Level
                                                                    Profile

mill. This plane is not penetrated in any milling strategy.         Depth

Click the Upper level button in the Milling levels area. The Pick Upper level dialog box is displayed.
Select the model face as shown.

The Upper level value (0) is determined and displayed in the Pick Upper level dialog box. Confirm this dialog box
by clicking  .

Click the Profile depth button in the Milling levels area. The Pick Lower level dialog box is displayed.

Pick the bottom edge of the model as sho wn. The Lower level value (-10) is determined and displayed in the Pick

Lower level dialog box. Confirm this dialog box with  .
Now you need to define the Delta depth.

                 The Delta parameter defines the offset for the cutting depth that can be changed with its associativity
                 preserved. The Delta value is always relative to the Profile depth defined for the operation.

Set the Delta value to -1.
The milling levels are defined.

                                                                                                                                              41
14. Define the technological parameters

 Switch to the Technology page of the Profile Operation dialog box.

 First, you need to make sure that the tool position relative to the
 geometry is correct. In the Modify section, check the Tool side
 option.

Modify
   The Tool side option enables you to determine the tool position relative to the geometry.
       Right ­ the tool cuts on the right side of the profile geometry.
       Left ­ the tool cuts on the left side of the profile geometry.
       Center ­ the center of the tool moves on the profile geometry (no compensation G4x can be
       used with this option).

Right  Left                                                           Center

The Geometry button displays the Modify Geometry dialog box that enables you to define the
modification parameters of the geometry and to choose which geometry chains are active in the
operation (in case of multiple chain geometry). The chain geometry of the profile is displayed
on the model with the chain direction indicated and a circle representing the tool relative to the
geometry.

In this case, the default Left option meets the requirements of climb milling. Click the Geometry button to check
the tool position.

               This tool position is correct. Click  to close the Modify Geometry dialog box. The Profile Operation dialog box
               is displayed again.
               InventorCAM enables you to perform the rough and finish machining of the profile in a single Profile operation.

42
                                                                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Define the parameters of the Profile roughing. Select the Rough check box. Define the Step down parameter for
roughing.

Step down                                                     Step down

   Profile roughing is performed in constant Z-passes. The               Upper
   Step down parameter defines the distance between each two             level
   successive Z-levels.
                                                                            Profile
                                                                            depth

Set the Step down to 5. With this value, InventorCAM performs two cuts at the following Z-levels: -5, -10; the
last cut is performed at the Z-level defined by Profile depth.

Now you need to define the wall offset that will remain after the roughing passes.

Offsets

   The Wall offset and Floor offset parameters enable you to define the allowances that remain on the
   walls and the floor of the machined part till the profile finish machining. These allowances can be
   removed with the finish passes in the same Profile operation or in an additional Profile operation
   with another tool.

     Step down  Wall offset
Profile depth

                Floor offset

 In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset value to 0.5. The allowance of 0.5 mm will be left on the model walls
 during the profile roughing. This allowance will be removed with a separate finishing cut in the end of the profile
 machining.

 Select the Finish check box to perform the finishing of the profile.

15. Define the Lead in and Lead out

 Switch to the Link page of the Profile Operation dialog
 box.

 This page enables you to define the way the tool approaches
 the profile and retreats away.

                                                                         43
    Profile Lead in and Lead out

    The lead-in movement is necessary to prevent vertical entering of the tool into the material. With
    the lead-in strategies the tool descends to the machining level outside of the material and then
    horizontally penetrates the material with the lead-in movement. The lead-out strategy enables you
    to perform the retract movements outside the material.

    The following options are available:

    · None

       The tool leads in to and out from the milling level exactly adjacent to
       the start point of the profile.

    · Normal                                                                    Normal
                                                                                Length
       The tool leads in to and out from the profile from a point normal
       to the profile. The length of the normal can be set in the Normal   Tangent
       length field. The distance between the normal and material is set   Extension
       in the Tangent extension field.

    · Arc

                                                                           Radius

    The tool leads in to and out from the profile with a tangential

    arc. The arc radius can be set in the Radius field. The length         Tangent
    of the extension can be set in the Tangent extension field. The        Extension

    arc angle is set in the Arc angle field. The Flip check box is

    available for selection when Tool side is chosen as Center on

    the Technology page. When this check box is selected, the lead move is flipped to the opposite

    side from its initial orientation, as if it was mirrored relative to the tool path. This option is

    available only for Normal and Arc Lead in types.

    · Tangent                                                               Length

       The tool leads in/out on a line tangent to the profile. The length  Tangent
       of the tangent can be set in the Length field. The distance to the  Extension
       material can be set in the Tangent extension field.

    · Point

    The tool leads in/out from a user-defined position. From this          Tangent
    position, the tool moves on a straight line to the start point         Extension
    of the profile. When you select this option, the Pick button is
    activated so that you can select a position directly on the solid
    model. The distance between the point and material is set in the
    Tangent extension field.

    The Lead In/Out with Points are fully associative. You can associate the point location to
    Vertex, Circular edge center, Sketch point, Sketch arc center, Work axis and Cylindrical face
    axis. The Points will synchronize and update the tool path if the location of the point on the
    solid model is changed.

44
                                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

· User-defined

The tool leads in/out from a user-defined position. When you select this option, you can define
a geometry of the tool approach to the material.

When the Same as Lead in check box is selected, the strategy and parameters defined for Lead in
are used for Lead out.

For Lead in, use the default Arc option. Set the Tangent
extension value to 5 and the Radius value to 2.

Under Lead out, select the Same as Lead in check box.

The definition of the basic technological parameters of profile
milling is finished.

16. Calculate the Tool path

 Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated. The preview of the calculated tool
 path is displayed on the solid model.

17. Simulate the operation
 The preview of the tool path can also be activated using the Host CAD simulation mode in Simulation control
 panel.
 Click the Simulate button in the Profile Operation dialog box. The Simulation control panel is diplayed. Switch to
 the Host CAD simulation mode and click the Play icon.

       The Host CAD simulation mode enables you to display the tool path directly on the model in the Autodesk
       Inventorwindow. Since all the View options of InventorCAM are active during the simulation, you can see
       the tool path from different perspectives and zoom on a certain area of the model.
 Switch to the SolidVerify page and start the simulation.
 When the simulation is finished, play the it step by step using .
 Close the simulation window. The Profile Operation dialog box is
 displayed. Close the Profile Operation dialog box.

                                                                                                                                                45
18. Add a Pocket operation

 The Pocket operation is used for the internal pocket machining. Right-
 click the Operations header and choose Pocket from the Add Milling
 Operation submenu

 The Pocket Operation dialog box is displayed.

19. Define the Geometry

 The geometry for a Pocket operation is generally represented by closed
 chains. In this exercise, you have to define a chain using the solid model edges.

Click  in the Geometry page to start the geometry definition. The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.

Using the Tangent Propagation option, define the chainas shown.

               Confirm the geometry definition by clicking  .
               The Pocket Operation dialog box is displayed.

               20. Define the Tool
               Switch to the Tool page and click the Select button.
               In this Profile operation, an End mill of Ø8 will be used.
               Choose the End mill tool for the operation and set the Diameter value to 8.

               Click to confirm the tool parameters and choose the tool for the operation.

               21. Define the Milling levels
               Switch to the Levels page of the Pocket Operation dialog box and define upper and lower levels of machining
               directly on the solid model.
               Define the Upper level as shown. The Upper level value (0) is
               determined.
               Define the Pocket depth by clicking on the pocket bottom face as
               shown. The Pocket depth value (8) is determined.
               Set the Step down value to 4 to perform the pocket machining in
               two equal steps.

46
The default Constant depth                                                      3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
                            icon indicates that the pocket will be machined at a constant depth.

22. Define the technological parameters

 Switch to the Technology page of the Pocket Operation dialog box. In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset
 and the Floor offset values to 0.2. These offsets remain unmachined during roughing and are removed with the
 further finishing.

 In the Finish area, select the Wall and Floor check boxes. These options enable you to perform finishing of the
 Wall offset and Floor offset that remain after the roughing.

 Define the machining strategy. Make sure that the default Contour option is chosen in the Technology section.

 When the Contour strategy is chosen, the tool moves on offsets parallel to the pocket contour.

Switch to the Contour tab to display the Contour parameters. This page enables you to define the parameters of
the Contour strategy.

              Contour parameters
                    Start from
                    · Inside

                     This option allows you to work in a pocket area starting from the
                     middle of the pocket and cutting towards the outside border of
                     the pocket.

                    · Outside

                     This option allows you to work in a pocket area starting from the outside border of the pocket
                     and cutting towards the middle of the pocket.

                    Corner
                    · None

                     The tool path is formed with sharp corners between one direction
                     and the next.

                            47
    · Fillet

    This option connects each direction with a given radius allowing
    for a smoother transition between path directions.

    The Min. corner radius option enables you to define the minimal
    value of the corner radius.

              If the given radius is too large for a specific corner, it
              produces the largest possible radius at that point.

              Sometimes the fillet option can leave some material. This particularly happens if the
              given radius is large.

    · Loop

    This option ensures that the connecting points on the path are
    cleaned using a smooth transition. The tool path forms a loop in
    the corner, preventing an abrupt change of direction.

    · Sharp

       This option ensures that using a short and simple movement cleans
       the connecting points on the path. Although this produces a sharp
       movement by the tool, the path itself is slightly shorter than the
       smooth corner option. This can help cut down on machining time.

                      This option is not recommended for high-speed
                      cutting.

    Direction

    This option enables you to choose climb or
    conventional milling for the roughing operation.

    Adjacent passes connection  Climb milling                              Conventional milling

    This option enables you to choose the method of the tool movement within the pocket from one
    tool path pass to the next one.

    · Smooth

    The tool performs an arc movement from one tool path pass to
    the next one. The connection points may not lie on one line, thus
    forming an angle with the line normal to the tool path.

48
                                                      3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

· Linear

The tool performs normal approach from one tool path pass to the
next one.

· Rounded

   The tool performs an arc movement from one tool path pass to the
   next one. The connection points are located on the line, which is
   normal to the tool path.

Exit material

This option controls the tool movements between the working areas.

Exit material check box not  Exit material check box
             selected                  selected

When the tool moves from The tool exits the material

one working area to the next, and travels rapidly above the

it moves through the full material to the next working

material around the island to area as shown above. The

get to the next working area lead in path is the Lead in you

as shown above.              define.

Connect islands

This option enables you to keep the same cutting direction (conventional
or climb milling) throughout the entire tool path where possible. This is
particularly important in high-speed cutting.

 This operation will be performed with the default Contour parameters.

23. Define the Ramping strategy
 Switch to the Link page of the Pocket Operation dialog box. Define the strategy with which the tool is plunging
 into the material during the pocket roughing.

                  The following Ramping strategies are available for rough machining of pockets:

                       · None

                      The tool enters the material vertically at the pocket start point chosen automatically by the
                      InventorCAM pocket algorithm.

                                                                                                                                                49
                                        · Vertical

                                    The tool enters the material vertically at a user-defined position. From this position, the tool
                                    moves to the pocket start point calculated by the pocket algorithm. Click the Pick button to
                                    specify the position where the tool plunges into the material.

                                        · Angle

                                    The tool moves to the pocket start point at a specified ramp angle. Enter the ramping angle
                                    value into the Angle edit box. The start point must be selected using the Points button.

                                    I nventorCAM does not check the ramping movement against the pocket contour. Check the
                                    tool path simulation to make sure that the tool does not gouge the pocket walls or islands.

                                        · Helical

                                    The tool descends from the safety distance above the Upper level to the material in a circular
                                    motion until the step down is reached using the user-defined radius. When the tool reaches the
                                    step down depth, it machines all the material at the step down depth. Click the Points button
                                    to set the helical ramping parameters.

                                        · Linear

                                    The Linear ramping follows the same rules as the Helical ramping. The difference is that the
                                    descent is performed in a linear zigzag fashion rather than in a circular one.

               Choose the Helical option. This option enables you to define the ramping position and the related parameters for
               each chain used in the Pocket operation.

                               Helical Ramping Parameters

                                The Tool step down parameter defines the distance between each two adjacent turns of the tool
                                helical movement.

                                The Angle parameter defines the ramping angle.

                                The Radius parameter defines the radius of the descending helix.

                                        Center cutting

                                    If your tool has center cutting capabilities, select the Center cutting check box. In the Angle
                                    field, enter the descent angle that you would like the tool to follow. In the Radius field, enter
                                    the radius of the tool path helix.

                                The working order is as follows:
                                · The tool descends from the safety distance above the Upper level to the material in a circular

                                    motion until the step down is reached using the user-defined radius.
                                · When the tool reaches the step down depth, it machines all the material at the step down depth.
                                · When the machining is completed at this depth, the tool goes up to the Clearance level.
                                · At this stage, the tool repositions itself at the Z safety distance above the previous step down

                                    depth and repeats the Helical Lead in to the next working depth.
                                · This process repeats itself until the final depth has been machined.

50
                                                                              3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

If the tool does not have center cutting capabilities, do not select the Center cutting check box. In
the Tool step down field, enter the depth of the step down of the tool. The result of this action is
the same as with a center cutting tool except for the following differences:

· The tool descends from the safety distance above the Upper level to the material in a circular
   motion up to the Tool Step down.

· At this point, the tool clears a circular path. Then it descends to the next Tool step down.

· This is repeated until the tool reaches the CAM-Part step down depth.

· When the tool reaches the step down depth, it machines all the material on that step down
   depth.

· When the machining is completed at this depth, the tool goes up to the Clearance level.

· At this stage, the tool repositions itself at the Z safety distance above the previous step down
   depth and repeat the Helical Lead in to the next working depth.

· This process repeats itself until the final depth has been machined.

To define the ramping position, click the Points button. The Ramping points
dialog box is displayed.

Chains

This section displays the list of all geometry chains defined for the operation.
All the chain entries are displayed under the Chains header. You can select
chain entries in the list. When the Chains header is selected, InventorCAM
displays the tool path and default ramping positions for all of the chains.
The circles represent the default helical ramping movement defined for each
chain.

Tool path start position  Ramping position

When a chain entry is selected, InventorCAM displays the tool path and the default ramping
position for this chain. This position is automatically defined at the start position of the tool path
segment relevant for the current chain. You can change this position by picking a point on the
model or by entering the new position coordinates into the X, Y, Z dialog box. The schematic circle
facilitates the definition of the position.

When the position is picked, it is marked on the model with a blue dot. The coordinates of the
picked point are displayed in the X, Y, Z dialog box. The circle of the tool path color represents the
helical movement of the tool plunging.

When the ramping position is defined, the tool descends into the material at the specified ramping
position with helical movements according to the defined parameters. When it reaches the level
of the first cutting pass, it moves to the start position of the tool path and performs machining
of the pocket.

                                                                                                                           51
Ramping Position

The Set default button enables you to replace the currently defined ramping position for the
selected chain by the default ramping position located at the tool path start position.

The Auto next button provides you with the selection mode that enables you to define the ramping
positions for all of the chains one by one.

Pre-Drill Operations

Upon selecting the Pre-Drilling Operations check box, the definition windows are activated. When
a Drill operation is chosen from the list, the associated X- and Y-coordinates appear in the Drill
positions list. The drill diameter and positions data are used for the approach point calculations.

Confirm the Ramping points dialog box with  .

24. Define the Lead in and Lead out

 The Lead in and Lead out strategies are used for defining the horizontal approach/retreat of the tool to/from the
 geometry in the finish machining of the part walls.

Pocket Lead in and Lead out

The following Lead in and Lead out strategies are available for pocket machining:

· None

   The tool leads in to and out from the milling level exactly adjacent to the start point of the
   geometry.

· Normal

The tool leads in and out at the last point of the geometry  Tangent               Normal Length
with a movement normal to the pocket contour. The length     Extension
of the normal can be set in the Length field. The distance
between the normal and start of the geometry is set in the
Tangent extension field.

· Arc

The tool leads in to and out from the geometry with a

circular motion, tangent to the last entity of the pocket

contour. The arc radius can be set in the Radius field. The

length of the extension can be set in the Tangent extension  Tangent
                                                             Extension

field. The arc angle is set in the Arc angle field.                                Radius

· Tangent

The tool leads in to and out from the pocket wall in a movement tangent to the last profile
entity. The length of the tangent can be set in the Length field. The distance to the material can
be set in the Tangent extension field.

When the Same as Lead in check box is selected, the strategy and parameters defined for Lead in
are used for Lead out.

               Under Lead in, choose the Arc option from the list and set the Tangent extension value to 3 and the Radius value
               to 2.

52
                                                                    3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Under Lead out, select the Same as Lead in check box.

25. Calculate the Tool path
 Click . The Pocket operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

26. Simulate the operation

 Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify and Host CAD simulation
 modes.

27. Add a Drilling operation

 This Drilling operation is used to perform the preliminary center drilling of the four holes in the corners of the
 model.

 Right-click the last Profile operation in InventorCAM Manager and choose Drilling from the Add Milling Operation
 submenu.
 The Drilling Operation dialog box is displayed.

28. Define the Drill geometry
 Make sure that the Technology is set to the default 2D drill option.
 In the Geometry area, click .
 The Drill Geometry Selection dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to select the geometry for
 drilling directly on the solid model.

                                                                                                                                                53
                     InventorCAM enables you to select the drill centers using the following options:

                     · Pick position

                         You can define drill centers one by one directly on the solid model.

                     · 3 Points on circumference

                         Usually, all curves and arcs of imported models are converted into
                         splines by the exporting CAD system. Due to the nature of spline curves
                         or surface boundaries, you cannot pick a center position like you could
                         on a circle or an arc. InventorCAM calculates the center position of an
                         arc defined by three points positioned on the spline edges. This facilitates
                         selecting drill centers on spline surfaces.

                     · Multi-positions

                         You can select the model face. InventorCAM automatically recognizes
                         all arcs/circles located on the selected face and selects the center points
                         as drill positions.

                     · All circle/arc centers

                         InventorCAM searches the solid model for arcs and circles and adds all
                         center points as drill positions to the geometry.

    Choose the All circle/arc centers option and click the corresponding button.

    Four drill positions are selected. Their coordinates are displayed
    in bottom part of the Drill Geometry Selection dialog box.

    Click  to confirm the geometry selection. The Drilling Operation dialog box is displayed.

    29. Define the Tool
     Switch to the Tool page of the Drilling Operation dialog box and click the Select button.
     The TOOLKIT window is displayed.

    Click the Drilling Tools  icon in the Library Toolbar. Double click the Spot drill tool to add it in Tool Item
    Manager.

54
                                                           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Spot Drill

                                           Arbor Diameter

                                 Diameter

             Total                                Outside
            Length                                Holder

                       Shoulder            Angle
                         Length

            Cutting Length

This tool type is used for center drilling and chamfering in Drilling operations.
A tool of this type is defined with the parameters shown in the image.

 A Spot drill of Ø6 is used in this operation.
 Click to choose the tool for the operation.
 The Drilling Operation dialog box is displayed. Click the Data tab.
 Define the spin and the feed for the operation.

       · Set the Spin rate to 1200
       · Set the Feed Z to 200
30. Define the center drilling depth
 Switch to the Levels page of the Drilling Operation dialog box. Click the Drill depth button and select the upper
 face of the model. The Drill depth value (0) appears in the relevant edit box.
 To perform the drilling down to the specified diameter of the tool, use the Depth type option.

                                                                                                                                                55
    Depth Type

       This option enables you to deepen the drilled hole in order to obtain a given diameter at the
       specified drill depth.

                           Depth                 Depth           Depth

          Cutter tip                             Full diameter         Diameter
                                                                       value
    · Cutter tip
                                                                 Diameter value

       The drill tip reaches the defined drill depth.

    · Full diameter

       The drill reaches the defined drill depth with the full diameter.

    · Diameter value

                        The drill reaches the defined drill depth with the drill cone diameter specified in the edit box.

                        The Diameter value can vary from 0 all the way up to the drill tool diameter. A value greater
                        than the drill tool diameter is automatically decreased to the drill tool diameter.

    Choose the Diameter value option and set the value to 5.
    In this manner, the drilling is performed till the tool diameter of 5 mm is reached at the depth of 0.

                           Drill Depth (0)

    Diameter_value (5)

    In accordance with these parameters, InventorCAM calculates the centering depth using the following formula:

    Centering_depth     =  Diameter_value  /  2                  Diameter_value     Centering_depth
                                                                             
                                 tan(/2)

    If Diameter_value is 5 mm, and  is 90°, the centering depth
    is calculated as follows:

    Centering_depth = 5/2 = 2.5
                               tan(90/2)

    31. Calculate the tool path

    Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

56
                                                                             3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

32. Simulate the operation
 Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify simulation mode.

33. Add a Drilling operation
 Add another Drilling operation to perform the through drilling of the holes.
 Right-click the last Drilling operation and choose Drilling from the Add Milling Operation submenu. The Drilling
 Operation dialog box is displayed.

34. Define the Geometry
 This operation is using the geometry that was defined in the previous center drilling operation. Choose the drill
 geometry from the list in the Geometry area.

       Each geometry defined in InventorCAM has a unique name. When the geometry is being defined, it is
       assigned a default name that can be changed. Using this name, you can choose the geometry for a specific
       operation.

35. Define the Tool
 Define a new Drill tool of Ø4 for this operation.

Click to choose the tool for the operation.
The Drilling Operation dialog box is displayed. Click the Data tab in the Tool page.
Define the spin and feed for the operation.

     · Set the Spin rate to 3000
     · Set the Feed Z to 360

36. Define the Drilling depth

The overall height of the model is 10 mm plus the 5 mm bottom offset defined

for the stock. The drilling has to be performed deeper than this depth in order to

enable the tool to exit from the material and perform the through drilling.           Height

                                                                                              57
               Switch to the Levels page.
               Define the Upper level by clicking on the top face of the model as shown.

               Define the Drill depth. Rotate the model and select the bottom face as shown.

               Since the Z- offset defined for the stock model is 5 mm, set the Delta value to -5.
               To perform the through drilling, choose the Full diameter option in the Depth type area. With this option, the
               drilling is performed until the full diameter is reached at the specified drill depth. This means that the conical part
               of the tool exits from the material.
               37. Define the Drilling type
               I nventorCAM enables you to use a number of drill canned cycles supported by your CNC-controller. In this
               operation, the pecking canned cycle is used for chip breaking. With this cycle, the chip breaking is accomplished
               by slight retracts of the tool during the drilling process.
               Switch to the Technology page and click the Drill cycle type button. Available drill cycles are displayed.
               Select the Peck option. The cycle is chosen for the operation.
               Click the Data button to define the pecking parameters. The Drill
               options dialog box is displayed.

58
                                                                                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
              Set the Step down to 1.5 in order to define the depth of each pecking movement.

              Confirm the data with the OK button.
             38. Calculate the tool path

              Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.
             39. Simulate the operation

              Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify simulation mode.

                   Since in the previous operation the drilling diameter was greater than that in this operation, the drilling
                   results in a chamfer on the drilled holes.
Now you have successfully finished the exercise.

                                                                                                                                                              59
 Exercise #3: Cover Machining

 In this exercise, a number of InventorCAM 2.5D operations are used for the cover part machining.
 The cover is machined on the 3-Axis milling CNC-machine using the machining vice. The part is machined using two setups.

 At the first stage, the workpiece is positioned in the vice as shown below. The highlighted faces are machined.

60
                                                                                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
At the next stage, the rest of the cover faces are machined using the second positioning.

             1. Load the Autodesk Inventormodel
              Load the Exercise3.iptmodel that is located in the Exercisesfolder.

              This model contains a number of features forming the solid body of the cover.
             2. Start InventorCAM

              To activate InventorCAM, click InventorCAM 2024 and choose Milling from the New submenu.
              InventorCAM is started, and the Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.
             3. Choose the CNC-controller
              Select the CNC-machine controller. Click the arrow to display the list of post-processors installed on your system.
              In this exercise, you use a 3-Axis CNC-machine. Choose the gMilling_3x CNC-controller from the list.

                                                                                                                                                              61
               4. Define the Stock model
               In this exercise, you have to define the Stock model before you define the Coordinate System in order to use the
               workpiece for the CoordSys definition.
               Click the Stock button in the Define section of the Milling Part Data dialog box.
               The Stock dialog box is displayed.
                     When the Coordinate System is not defined, InventorCAMenables you to use only the
                     Box method of the Stock model definition.
               I nventorCAM generates the stock box surrounding the model with the specified allowances.
               In the Expand box at section, set the value of the Z- parameter direction to 5. This allowance
               is used for the first clamping. Set the value of 2 for the rest of the directions.

               Click on the model. The face is highlighted, and the box surrounding the model is displayed.
               Click the Add box to CAD model button. The stock model box is added into the CAM component of the CAM-
               Part assembly as a 3D Sketch feature.
               Confirm the Stock dialog box with  . The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.
               5. Define the Coordinate System
               Click the CoordSys button in the Define area to start the Coordinate System definition.
               The CoordSys dialog box is displayed.
               In the Definition options list, choose the Define option.
               This mode enables you to define the Coordinate System by picking three points on the
               solid model.
               At first, you have to define the Coordinate System origin location and then the points for
               the X- and Y-directions.

62
                                                         3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Pick the origin point in the stock box corner as shown.

Click onthe stock model edge as shown to define the X-axis of the Coordinate System.
Click on the stock model edge as shown to define the Y-axis of the Coordinate System.

When a point is selected, the next button is automatically activated. If you miss the selection, you can at any
time select the button you want to define and continue automatically to the next button.

Confirm the Coordinate System definition with . Th e Coordinate System is displayed.

                                                                                       63
               The CoordSys Data dialog box is displayed.
               Define the Part Lower level directly on the solid model. This parameter defines the lower
               surface level of the part to be milled.
               In the Levels: Planar section, click the Part Lower level button.
               Rotate the model and select the lower face that is milled using the first positioning as
               shown.

               The Z-coordinate of the face (-12) is displayed in the Pick Part Lower level dialog box.
               Confirm this dialog box by clicking  .
               Confirm the CoordSys Data dialog box by clicking  .
               The icon of the defined Coordinate System is displayed in the CoordSys Manager dialog
               box.
               Confirm the CoordSys Manager dialog box with  . The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed again.
               6. Define the Target model
               Click the Target button in the Stock & Target section of the Milling Part Data dialog box.
               The Targetdialog box is displayed.

               This dialog box enables you to define a 3D model for the Target.
               Click on the solid body to select a target model. The solid body is highlighted.
               Confirm the Target dialog box with  .
               The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.
64
                           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

7. Save the CAM-Part data

In the Milling Part Data dialog box, click  .

The Milling Part Data dialog box is closed, and InventorCAM Manager is displayed. The defined CAM-Part is
saved.

At this stage, the definition of the CAM-Part is finished.

              At the next stage, you have to define several operations to machine the cover part. Using the first defined
              Coordinate System (first Setup), you have to perform the following operations:

               Upper face machining

Upper profile machining

Lower profile machining

 Hole pads machining

Then the part has to be rotated and clamped again. With the second Setup, the following operations are performed:
 Upper face machining

                           65
                Pocket machining

                Slot machining

                Holes machining

               8. Add a Face Milling operation
               In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Operations header and choose Face from the Add Milling Operation
               submenu. The Face Milling operation is used for the upper face machining.
               The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.

               9. Define the Face Milling geometry
               Click in the Geometry page. The Face Milling Geometry dialog box is displayed.
               Using the default Model option, click the Define button in the Base Geometry. The 3D Geometry dialog box is
               displayed. Click on the solid model to select a face.
               Confirm the 3D Geometry dialog box with  .
               In the Face Milling Geometry dialog box, define the 3 mm offset to machine over the stock edges. In the Modify
               section, set the Offset value to 3.
               Confirm the Face Milling Geometry dialog box by clicking  .
               The geometry is defined for the operation.

66
                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

10. Define the Tool

Define a new Face mill of Ø40 for this operation and edit the following parameters:

· Set the Shoulder length to 27.5

· Set the Cutting length to 10

InventorCAM enables you to define a variety of tool holders to help you check and prevent all possible collisions
between the tool holding system and the workpiece. This feature also enables you to see a more realistic simulation
in the SolidVerify simulation.

Select the Holder    icon from the Library Toolbar. Double click the Holder icon to display the available
holders.

The InventorCAM tool holder is defined by combining two components. The first component is
the tool adaptor mounted on the spindle unit of the milling machine. The second component can
consist of various types of extensions and reductions like collet chucks, arbors, shanks and other
components that you may have.

                       Tool adaptor

Extensions and reductions

InventorCAM enables you to define the Tool adaptor in the *.vmid file under Machine Definition
> Devices > Spindle > Stations.

                                                                                                                           67
               Expand Adaptors section below the Adaptors and Holders and double click CAT40 adaptor from the list. Expand
               BT40 section and double click the BT40 ER32×60 collet chuck by clicking its check box. This collet chuck is
               suitable for the chosen tool diameter (40 mm).

               Choose the defined tool for the operation by clicking . The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.
               11. Define the Face depth

               Switch to the Levels page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box. Click the Face depth button in the Milling
               levels area and select the model face as shown.

               The Face depth (2) is calculated.
               12. Define the technological parameters

               Switch to the Technology page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box. In the Technology section, use the Hatch
               option.

                               Hatch Machining Technology
                                The machining is performed in a linear pattern.

68
                                                                              3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

The Hatch page enables you to define the hatching parameters.

· Hatch angle

   When the Automatic optional angle option is chosen, Inventor automatically calculates the
   optimal angle of hatching to expedite the machining. The tool path always follows the length
   of the face no matter what angle the machined surface is facing.

The Delta from parameter enables you to change the hatching angle.
When the User-defined angle option is chosen, you can determine the angle of the tool path.

                          Angle
                     X

· Cutting direction

The One Way option enables you to create the tool path with only one-directional movements.

The Zigzag option enables you to create the tool path with bidirectional movements.

One Way              Zigzag

· Cutting order

   The Side to side option creates a tool path that starts the cutting on one side of the geometry,
   machines the face according to the Cutting direction and then performs its last cutting pass on
   the side opposite of the starting side. Selecting the Side to side option unchecks and enables
   the Classic spacing option in the Technology page.

   The Side to middle option creates a tool path that starts the cutting on one side of the face
   geometry and then moves to the opposite side before making the next cut. Each successive
   series of opposing parallel passes step inward until the last cutting pass is performed in the
   middle.

                                                                                     69
                                        · Extension

                                    During face milling, the tool path is extended over the edges of the machined face. The
                                    Extension section enables you to define the extension both along the tool path (the Along
                                    section) and across the tool path (the Across section).
                                    The extension can be defined either by percentage of the tool diameter (the % of tool diameter
                                    option) or by value (the Value option).

                                                                                                         Extension across
                                                                                                         the tool path
                                                                                                 Extension along
                                                                                                 the tool path

                                        · Corner

                                    When the None option is chosen, the tool path is formed with sharp corners between one
                                    direction and the next.

                                    The Fillet option connects each direction with a given radius allowing for a smoother transition
                                    between path directions.

                                        · Approach

                                    When the Roll in option is selected, the tool approaches the material while rolling into it with
                                    an arc movement. The Approach distance parameter enables you to define the length of the
                                    arc's linear extension.

               Click the Hatch tab to define the machining parameters.
               In the Hatch angle section, switch to the Automatic optimal angle option.
               Switch back to the Technology tab.
               Notice that in the Overlap section the % of tool diameter option is chosen and the value is set to 30, and the Equal
               step over and Classic spacing check boxes are selected.

70
                                                            3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Overlap

   This section enables you to define the tool overlapping          0.5D           0.2D
   between two successive passes. This option can be        Overlap 0.5D  Overlap 0.2D
   defined as Percentage of the tool diameter or as a
   Value.

Equal Step Over

This option enables you to generate the hatch tool path spaced evenly with the automatically
calculated Overlap value, which is nearest to the specified Min. Overlap value but not smaller than
this value.

         Overlapping  Overlapping

When this check box is not selected, the distance between the last pass and the one before it can
be smaller than that between all of the other passes.

         Overlapping  Overlapping

When this check box is selected, the evenly spaced hatch tool path is generated. The overlap
between two successive passes is not smaller than the specified Min. Overlap value.

         This option is available only for the Hatch strategy.

Define the roughing offset that remains on the floor of the face. This offset is left unmachined during the rough
face machining and removed during the face finishing.

In the Offsets section, set the Floor offset value to 0.2. Make sure that the Finish check box is selected to perform
finishing of the face in this operation. This option enables you to remove the remaining offset with the last
cutting pass.

13. Define the Lead in and Lead out

 Switch to the Link page of the Face Milling dialog box to define the way the tool approaches the material and
 retreats away.

 In the Lead in section, use the default Tangent option. This option enables the tool to approach the material on
 a line tangent to the profile. In the Length field, set the length of the tangent to 5.

                                                                                         71
               In the Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check box.

               14. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Face Milling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

               15. Simulate
               Click the Simulate button in the Face Milling Operation dialog box. The Simulation control panel is displayed.
               Switch to the SolidVerify page and start the simulation.

               Close the simulation. The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.
               Close this dialog box with .
               16. Add a Profile operation
               At this stage, you have to define a Profile operation in order to
               machine the upper profile of the cover.
               In InventorCAM Manager, add a new Profile operation.

72
                                                  3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

17. Define the Geometry

Click  in the Geometry page of the Profile Operation dialog box. The Geometry

Edit dialog box is displayed.

Click the Add button in the Multi-chain section.

The Chains Selection dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to pick a
number of chains from the model by selecting the model elements. InventorCAM
automatically creates chains from the selected elements.

Click on the top face of the model as shown.

 The face is selected, and its boundary is highlighted.
 Click  to choose the selected chain as the geometry. The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.
 Confirm the geometry definition with  . The geometry is defined for the operation.

18. Define the Tool
 Add a new End mill tool of Ø16 for the operation.

Select CAT40 as adaptor and BT40 ER32×60 collet chuck as the holder.
Confirm the tool selection by clicking .

                                                                                                                                              73
19. Define the Profile depth

 Switch to the Levels page. In the same manner as explained in previous steps, define the Profile depth by clicking
 on the model face as shown below.

20. Define the technological parameters

 Switch to the Technology page. In the Modify section, set the Tool
 side to Right. Click the Geometry button to check the tool position
 relative to the geometry.

 Close the Modify Geometry dialog box with the  .

 Now you have to define the roughing and finishing parameters.
 InventorCAM Profile operation enables you to perform the rough
 and finish machining in the single operation.

 Select the Rough check box. Set the Step down value to 3.5. The profile is machined in two equal Z-steps.

 In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset and the Floor offset to 0.2. These allowances are removed during the
 finish machining.

 Select the Clear offset check box. Set the Offset value to 5 and the Step over value to 2.5.

Clear Offset

This option generates several concentric profiles with a constant depth that start from the defined
clear offset distance from the profile and finish up to the geometry of the profile, thus clearing the
area around the profile.

The Offset defines the distance from the geometry                       Geometry
at which the milling starts. The Clear offset value     Wall offset
should be equal to or larger than the Wall offset
value. The tool starts milling the profile at the
distance defined by the Clear offset and finishes at
the distance defined by the Wall offset; the overlap
of the adjacent tool paths is defined by the Step over
parameter.

The Step over parameter defines the overlap of Clear offset                       Step over
adjacent tool paths. It determines the offset between
two successive concentric profiles.

               In the Finish section, set the Step down value to 7. The 0.2 mm allowances that remain after the roughing will be
               removed in one step.

74
                                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

21. Define the Lead in and Lead out

Switch to the Link page. In the Lead in section, choose the Tangent option. With this option, the tool approaches
the material tangentially to the geometry in the start point. Set the Length value to 12.

In the Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check box.

22. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

23. Simulate
 Click the Simulate button in the Profile Operation dialog box. The Simulation control panel is displayed.
 Switch to the SolidVerify page and start the simulation.

                 The SolidVerify simulation mode enables you to measure distances directly on solid bodies in the
                 SolidVerify window. This feature enables checking the linear dimensions of the part during
                 simulation.
Click on the toolbar. The Measure Distance dialog box is displayed.
Click on the top face of the cover and then on the horizontal face machined in the current operation.

The coordinates of the pocket points and the result distance are displayed in the
Measure Distance dialog box.
I nventorCAM displays the measured distance value and Delta values for the X-, Y- and
Z-axes. In this case, the Delta Z parameter displays the depth of the machined face
relative to the cover top face (5).

                                                                                                                                              75
Close the simulation window. The Profile Operation dialog box is displayed.
Close the Profile Operation dialog box with .

24. Add a Profile operation

 At this stage, you have to define a Profile operation in order to
 machine the lower profile of the cover.

 In InventorCAM Manager, add a new Profile operation.

25. Define the Geometry

Click  in the Geometry page. The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.

Click on the workpiece edge as shown to define the first entity of the chain.

               In the Chain section, choose the Constant Z Propagation option. The closed chain is automatically selected.
               The confirmation message is displayed. Confirm it by clicking Yes.
               Confirm the geometry with  .
               26. Define the Tool
               In this operation, use the same tool as in the previous operation (Ø16 End mill).
               27. Define the Profile depth
               You have to define a new Upper level for the operation taking into account the already machined faces. Switch to
               the Levels page and click the Upper level button in the Milling levels area.
               Define the U pper level by clicking on the model face as shown.

76
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 Confirm the definition of the Upper level with  .
 In the same manner as explained in the previous steps, define the Profile depth by clicking on the model vertex
 as shown.

28. Define the technological parameters
 Switch to the Technology page of the Profile Operation dialog box. In the Modify section, set the Tool side to
 Right. Click the Geometry button to adjust the tool position relative to the geometry.

 Close the Modify Geometry dialog box with  .
 Now you have to define the parameters of profile roughing and finishing.
 Select the Rough check box. Set the Step down value to 2.5. The profile is machined in two equal Z-steps.
 In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset value to 0.5. This allowance is removed during the finish machining.
 Select the Finish check box and set the Step down value to 5. The 0.5 mm allowance that remains after the
 roughing is removed in one step.
29. Define the Lead in and Lead out
 Switch to the Link page of the Profile Operation dialog box. In the Lead in section, use the default Arc option.
 The tool approaches the material tangentially to the geometry at the start point. Set the Radius value to 12.
 In the Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check box.
30. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                                                                77
               31. Simulate
               Click the Simulate button in the Profile Operation dialog box. The Simulation
               control panel is displayed.
               Switch to the SolidVerify page and start the simulation.
               Close the simulation. The Profile Operation dialog box is displayed. Close the
               Profile Operation dialog box with .

               32. Add a Profile operation
               At this stage, you have to define a new Profile operation to machine four
               hole pads.
               In InventorCAM Manager, add a new Profile operation.

               33. Define the Geometry
               In the Geometry page, click . The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.
               Click on the model edge as shown.

               Click on the next model edges as shown below to complete the chain.

               Click  to confirm the chain selection.

78
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 In the same manner, define the geometry for the rest of the pads. Make sure that all the selected chains have the
 same direction. Confirm the geometry definition by clicking  .
34. Define the Tool
 Define a new tool for the operation. Use an End mill of Ø8 with CAT40 adaptor and BT40 ER32×60 tool holder.

35. Define the Milling levels
 In this operation, the machining starts at the Z-level of the already
 machined faces. The upper level has to be defined.
 Define the Upper level by clicking on the already machined model
 face as shown.
 In the same manner as explained earlier, define the Profile depth by
 clicking on the pad face as shown.

36. Define the technological parameters
 Select the Rough check box. Set the Step down value to 3. The profile is machined in one Z-step.
 In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset value to 0.5. This allowance is removed during the finish machining.
 Select the Clear offset check box. Set the Offset value to 5 and the Step over value to 4.5.
 Select the Finish check box and set the Step down value to 3. The 0.5 mm allowance remaining after the roughing
 will be removed in one step.

37. Define the Lead in and Lead out
 Set the Arc option for Lead in. Set the Radius value to 2. In the Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check
 box. The tool leads in/leads out to the profile with a tangential arc.

                                                                                                                                                79
               38. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

               39. Simulate
               Click the Simulate button in the Profile Operation dialog box. The
               Simulation control panel is displayed.
               Switch to the SolidVerify page and start the simulation.
               Close the simulation. The Profile Operation dialog box is displayed.
               Close the Profile Operation dialog box with

 At this point, the machining of the external cover faces is finished. At the next
 stages you have to machine the internal faces.

               40. Define a New Coordinate System
               The machining of the internal model faces requires another positioning.
               The part has to be rotated and clamped in a vice as shown.
               InventorCAM enables you to define the second Coordinate System.
               Double-click the CoordSys Manager header in InventorCAM Manager. The
               CoordSys Manager dialog box is displayed.

               Click the Add button. The CoordSys dialog box is displayed.
               In the Mac CoordSys number field, set the value to 2. Changing of the Mac CoordSys
               number means that a new clamping is used.
               Make sure that the S elect face mode is chosen.
               When this mode is chosen, SolidInventorCAM enables you to define a new Coordinate
               System by selecting a planar face. In this case, the Z-axis of the Coordinate System is
               normal to the selected face.
               The Coordinate System origin is placed according to the Place CoordSys origin to setting.
               Make sure that the Top corner of model box option is chosen.

80
                                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Rotate the model and click on its bottom face a s shown below.

                 In this case, the box surrounding the model is calculated.

                 The upper plane of the model box is parallel to the XY-plane of the defined CoordSys.
                 The CoordSys is located in the corner of the model box with the following coordinates: (XMIN, , YMIN
                 ZMAX).

Now you have to move the origin of the Coordinate System from the automatically defined position to the corner
of the workpiece.
Select the Pick origin check box in the Modify by pick section of the CoordSys dialog box.
Click on the corner of the workpiece (stock model) as shown to choose it for the origin. The origin is moved to
the new location.

Confirm the CoordSys dialog box by clicking  .
                                                                                                                                              81
               The CoordSys Data dialog box is displayed.
               I nventorCAM automatically determines the Part Upper level and the Part Lower level parameters relative to the
               Coordinate System location.
               Confirm the dialog box with  .
               The CoordSys Manager dialog box is displayed.

               Two Machine Coordinate Systems are listed in the CoordSys Manager dialog box. Using
               them you can program operations for different positions (clamping). The Machine
               Coordinate System #2 is used for the machining of the back face and the internal faces.
               Click  to confirm the CoordSys Manager dialog box.
               41. Add a new Face Milling operation
               Add a new Face Milling operation to perform the back face milling.

               42. Define the Geometry
               Since this operation is performed with the second Coordinate System position, choose the Machine Coordinate
               System #2.
               Choose MAC 2 from the CoordSys list in the Geometry section.
               Click to start the geometry definition. The Face Milling Geometry dialog box is displayed.
               In the Type section, use the default Model option for the Face Milling geometry definition. Click the Define
               button. The 3D Geometry dialog box is displayed.
               Click on the solid model to select it. The model is highlighted, and its icon appears in the list. Confirm the 3D
               Geometry dialog box by clicking  .
               The Face Milling Geometry dialog box is displayed again.

82
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 The rectangle is generated surrounding the Target model at the XY-plane.

 Define the 3 mm offset to extend the machined surface over the stock edges. In the Modify section, set the Offset
 value to 3.
 Click  to confirm the Face Milling Geometry dialog box. The geometry is defined for the operation.
43. Define the Tool
 Use the Ø40 Face mill used in previous operations.
 Click the Select button in the Tool page. Choose the Face mill tool that was defined for the first face milling
 operation.
 The Face Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.
44. Define the Milling levels
 In this operation, the machining starts on the top face of the workpiece (Z=0 of the Machine Coordinate System
 #2) and ends on the back face of the cover part (Z=-5 of the Machine Coordinate System #2).
 Define the Upper level b y clicking on the workpiece corner as shown.
 Define the Face depth directly on the solid model by clicking on its bottom
 face as shown below.

 Set the Step down to 2.5.
45. Define the technological parameters

 Switch to the Technology page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box. In the Technology section, use the Hatch
 option and click the Hatch tab.
 In the Hatch angle section, switch to the Automatic optimal angle option.

                                                                                                                                                83
               Switch back to the Technology tab. Note that in the Overlap section the % of tool diameter option is chosen, and
               the value is set to 30.
               Define the roughing offset that remains on the floor of the face. This offset is being left unmachined during the
               rough face machining and is removed during the face finishing.
               In the Offsets section, set the Floor offset value to 0.2. Select the Finish check box to perform finishing of the
               face in this operation. This check box enables you to remove the remaining offset with the last cutting pass.
               46. Define the Lead in and Lead out
               Switch to the Link page of the Face Milling Operation dialog box to define the way the tool approaches the
               material and retreats away.
               In the Lead in section, use the Tangent option. This option enables the tool to approach the material on a line
               tangent to the profile. In the Length field, set the length of the tangent to 5.
               In the Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check box.
               47. Save and Calculate
               Click .
               InventorCAM notifies you that the upper level chosen for the operation is above the CoordSys Upper level.

               Confirm this message with the Yes button. The operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.
               48. Simulate

               Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify mode.
               The bottom face machining is finished. Now you have to perform the pocket machining.

84
                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
Pocket machining overview

   The pocket is machined in several technological steps:
                                         The rough machining of the
                                         upper part of the pocket.
                                         The machining is performed
                                         until the Z-level of the pads is
                                         reached.
                                         The rough machining of the
                                         pocket with islands (pads).
                                         The machining is performed
                                         from the upper face of the
                                         pads till the pocket floor.
                                         At this stage, two operations
                                         are used to perform the
                                         machining with two tools of
                                         big and small diameter.
                                         The finish machining of the
                                         outside wall of the pocket.

                                         The finish machining of the
                                         island walls.

                                         The finish machining of the
                                         island top face.

                                         The finish machining of the
                                         pocket floor.

                                                                                                                               85
               49. Add a Pocket operation
               Add a new Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the upper part of the pocket down to the pads
               height.

               50. Define the Geometry
               In the Feature Recognition Mode section, choose the option of Chains without Feature Recognition.Choose
               the Machine Coordinate System #2 and define the geometry as shown below using the Constant Z Propagation
               option.

               51. Define the Tool
               Choose the already defined Ø16 End mill for the pocket rough machining operation.

               52. Define the Pocket depth
               Define the Pocket depth directly on the solid model. Use the top face of the pads for the definition .

               InventorCAM uses the constant-Z passes for the Pocket generation. The Step down parameter enables you to
               define the distance between each two successive Z-levels.
               Set the Step down value to 2. The pocket is machined in two Z-levels.
               53. Define the technological parameters
               Switch to the Technology page of the Pocket Operation dialog box. Make sure that the default Contour option is
               chosen in the Technology section.
               In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset and the Floor offset values to 0.2. These offsets remain unmachined
               during roughing and are removed with the further finishing.
               54. Define the Ramping strategy
               Switch to the Link page of the Pocket Operation dialog box. In the Ramping section, choose the Helical option.
86
                                           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Set the Radius of the descent helix to 3.

55. Define the Lead out
 In the Lead out section, choose the Arc option and set the Radius value to 2.

                  With a circular motion tangent to the last entity of the pocket contour, the tool retreats from the
                  profile. The radius of the arc must be specified.

                              Radius

56. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Pocket operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

57. Simulate
 Perform the simulation of the Pocket operation in the SolidVerify
 mode.
 During the simulation, notice the helical lead in movement.

58. Add a new Pocket operation

 Add a new Pocket operation to machine the bottom part of the pocket including two islands (pads for the circuit
 board installing).

                                                                               87
               59. Define the Geometry
               Choose the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operation.
               In the same manner as explained in the Step #17 of this exercise, define the multi-chain geometry by clicking on
               the pocket bottom face as shown below.Ensure that in the Feature Recognition Mode section, you choose the
               option of Chains without Feature Recognition.

               InventorCAM automatically determines the edges of the selected face and defines chains on them. The first chain
               is the external boundary of the pocket. All closed chains inside the first chain of each pocket are automatically
               treated as pocket islands. Overlapping chains are milled as separate pockets, not as islands. To select multiple
               pockets with islands, continue adding chains to the geometry.
               60. Define the Tool
               Choose the Ø16 End mill for the operation.
               61. Define the Milling levels
               The machining in this operation starts at the Z-level of the top faces of the pads and ends on the bottom face
               of the pocket.
               Define the Upper level by selecting the top face of the pads as shown.

               Define the Lower level by selecting the bottom face of the pocket.

88
                         3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Set the Step down to 2.

62. Define the technological parameters
 Make sure that the default Contour option is chosen in the Technology section.
 In the Offsets section of the Technology page, set the Wall offset, Island offset and Floor offset values to 0.2.
 These offsets remain unmachined during roughing and are removed in the next finishing operations.

                  Wall offset ­ the roughing offset remaining on the wall of the pocket.

Island offset ­ the roughing offset remaining on the pocket's islands.

Floor offset ­ the roughing offset remaining on the floor of the pocket.

63. Define the Ramping strategy
 In the Ramping section of the Link page, choose the Helical option. Set the Radius of the descent helix to 3.

64. Define the Lead out
 In the Lead out section, choose the Arc option. Set the Radius value to 2.

65. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Pocket operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                                                                89
               66. Simulate
               Perform the Pocket operation simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

 Make a note that the pocket geometry is not completely machined because the tool is too large to reach some model areas.
 In order to complete the machining, you have to perform an additional Pocket operation with a tool of a smaller diameter in
 the areas that were not machined in the current Pocket operation.

               67. Add a new Pocket operation
               Add a new Pocket operation. InventorCAM enables you to use the existing operations as templates for new ones.
               In this case, the last created Pocket operation is used to define a new Pocket operation from the template. In the
               Operation name section, choose the last defined operation name (P_contour4) from the list.
               All the parameters of the chosen operation are copied to the current one.

               68. Define the Tool
               Define a new tool for the operation.
               Click the Select button in the Tool page.
               Define a new End mill tool with the following parameters.

               Select C AT40 as the adaptor and BT40 ER32x60 collet chuck as the holder.
               Click to choose the defined tool.

90
                                                        3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

69. Define the Rest material parameters

In the Rest Material/Chamfer section of the Technology page, choose the Rest option from the list.

During the machining, when a large tool is used, the tool leaves material in areas that it cannot
enter.

Unmachined area                          Machined area

                                                                            Geometry

                               The Rest material option enables you to remove the material from these areas without defining a
                               new geometry.

              The new Rest tab appears and opens the page automatically.
              Notice that the Separate areas option is chosen by default in the
              Milling type box. When this option is chosen, InventorCAM performs
              the machining only in areas that were not machined with the previous
              tool.
              Define the diameter of the end mill that was used in the previous
              operation. Click the Previous tool diameter button.
              The TOOLKIT window is displayed with all the tools used in the operations of the current CAM-Part. Choose the
              Ø16 End mill used in the previous operation and click .
              In the Previous wall offset field, set the value of 0.2. This offset was defined in the previous Pocket operation.
              Define the Extension/Overlap parameter ­ the overlap distance that you would like to start from and end with the
              previous larger end mill. Set the Extension/Overlap value to 1.

             70. Save and Calculate

              Click . The Pocket operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

             71. Simulate

              Play the simulation of the Pocket operation in the SolidVerify mode.
              Notice that the machining is performed only in the areas that were not
              machined in the previous operation.
At this stage, the rough machining of the pocket is completed, and you have to program
the finishing operations.

                                                                                                    91
               72. Add a Profile operation
               A Profile operation is used for the finish machining of the pocket walls.

               73. Define the Geometry
               In the Geometry page, click to view the geometries defined for the current Coordinate System.
               The Browse Geometries dialog box is displayed with a list of geometries defined for this CAM-Part associated
               with the current Coordinate System. You can click entries in the list to display the corresponding geometries on
               the model.
               Choose the profile3 geometry from the list.

               Confirm the Browse Geometries dialog box by clicking  .
               74. Define the Tool

               Choose the already existing Ø6 End mill.
               75. Define the Profile depth

               Define the Profile depth by clicking on the bottom face of the pocket.

               76. Define the technological parameters
               In this operation, use the Equal step down option to keep an equal distance between all Z-levels.

92
           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Equal Step down                                                                                  Max.
                                                                                                 Step down
   This option enables you to perform all cuts at an equal Z-level distance
   one from the other. InventorCAMautomatically calculates the actual        Actual Step down
   step down to keep an equal distance between all passes.

   When the Equal step down check box is selected, Step down is
   replaced by Max step down. This value is taken into account during
   the calculation of the actual step down so that it is not exceeded.

Select the Equal step down check box.

Select the Finish check box and set the Max step down value to 3.

In the Depth type area, choose the Helicaloption.

                 The Helical milling option enables you to enhance the productivity of profile machining by
                 avoiding lead in/out movements at each Z-level and eliminating unnecessary rapid movements.

                 With the Helical option, the tool performs spiral movements around the geometry with continuous
                 lowering along the Z-axis.

                 For each turn around the geometry, the tool moves downward
                 along the Z-axis according to the step down value. When the
                 Profile depth is reached by the spiral movements, InventorCAM
                 performs the last cut with the constant-Z movement at the
                 Profile depth.

Step Down

77. Define the Lead in and Lead out
 Choose the Normal option in the Lead in section of the Link page and set the Normal length value to 5. In the
 Lead out section, select the Same as Lead in check box. The tool approaches the material with the movement
 normal to the pocket contour and retreats in the same way.

78. Save and Calculate

 Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                            93
79. Simulate
 Play the simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

80. Add a Profile operation
 Add a new Profile operation to machine the walls of the islands.

81. Define the Geometry                                               in the Geometry page. The Geometry

 Choose the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operation and click
 Edit dialog box is displayed.

 Select the edge of the island as shown.

Make sure that the chain direction is clockwise. Such direction enables you to perform the climb milling of the
profile.

               In the Single entities section, choose the Constant Z Propagation option. The chain is automatically completed.
               The confirmation message is displayed. Confirm it by clicking Yes. The first chain is defined.

94
                                                                        3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Select the edge ofthe other island as shown below.

 Make sure that the chain direction is clockwise. Such direction enables you to perform the climb milling of the
 profile.
 In the Chain section, choose the Constant Z Propagation option. The chain is automatically completed and the
 confirmation message is displayed. Confirm it by clicking the Yes button.

                  The first selected entity in the geometry chain defines the approach location for the whole chain.
                  In this case, the internal edges of the pads are chosen in order to prevent the collision between the
                  tool and pocket wall during the lead in movement.

 Confirm the Geometry definition with  .

82. Define the Tool
 Choose the Ø6 End mill for the operation.

83. Define the Milling levels
 Define the operation Upper level directly on the solid model by clicking on the top face of the pad as shown.

Define the Profile depth by clicking on the bottom face of the pocket.

                                                                        95
    84. Define the technological parameters
     In the Technology page, make sure the Finish check box is selected and set the Step down value to 4.
     In the Depth type area, set the Helical option.

    85. Define the Lead in and Lead out
     Choose the Arc option in the Lead in section and set the Radius value to 2. In the Lead out section, select the
     Same as Lead in check box. The tool approaches the material with an arc movement tangential to the geometry
     and retreats in the same way.

    86. Save and Calculate
     Click . The Profile operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

    87. Simulate
     Play the simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

    88. Add a Face Milling operation
     Add a new Face Milling operation to machine the top faces of the pads.

    89. Define the Geometry

    In the Geometry page, choose the Coordinate System #2 (MAC 2) and click  to define the geometry for this
    milling operation.

    In the Face Milling Geometry dialog box, choose the Profile option in the Type section and then click the Define
    button.

96
                                            3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.

Click on the surfaces of both pads and confirm your selection by clicking  .

 The Face Milling Geometry dialog box is displayed again. In order to machine these two
 faces separately, click the Separate button in the Chain List section.
 Two separate chains are created.

 Confirm the geometry definition by clicking  .
90. Define the Tool

 Choose Ø8 End mill for the operation.
91. Milling levels

 Define the operation Upper level directly on the solid model by clicking on the top face of the pad.
 Define the Face depth value by clicking on the same face.
92. Define the technological parameters
 In the Technology page, choose the One Pass strategy from the list.
93. Save and Calculate
 Click . The operation data is saved, and tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                                                                97
               94. Simulate
               Play the simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

 At the next stage you have to machine the pocket floor.
               95. Add a Pocket operation
               Define a new Pocket operation to perform the finish machining of the pocket
               floor.

               96. Define the Geometry
               Use the already defined geometry contour4.

               97. Define the Tool
               Choose the Ø6 End mill for the operation.

               98. Define the Milling levels
               Define the operation Upper level directly on the bottom face of the pocket. Define the Pocket depth value by
               clicking on the same face to perform the machining in a single Z-level.

               99. Define the technological parameters
               Make sure that the default Contour strategy is chosen in the Technology page.
               In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset and Island offset values to 0.1. Such offset prevents the contact between
               the tool and the already finally machined wall and island surfaces during the floor machining.

               100. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Profile operation data is saved and the tool path is calculated.

98
                                               3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

101. Simulate
 Play the simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

102. Add a Slot operation

 Add a new Slot operation to machine the slot on the bottom face of the
 cover model.

 In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Operations header and choose the Slot item from the Add Milling
 Operation submenu.
 The Slot Operation dialog box is displayed.

103. Define the Geometry
 Choose the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operation and define the geometry for the slot as shown.

 Make sure that the chain direction is clockwise to perform the climb milling.

104. Define the Tool
 Define a new Ø1.5 End mill.
 Edit the tool parameters as shown in the image.

Choose C AT40 as the adaptor and BT40 ER16x70 collet chuck as the holder.
                                                                                                                                              99
     105. Define the technological parameters
      In the Tool side area, choose the Right option to machine the slot at the right side of the selected geometry.
      In the Slot levels area, click the Depth button to define the slot depth directly on the solid model.
      Click on the bottom face of the slot and confirm the definitionwith  .

     The Slot depth (1.5 mm) is determined.
     Set the Step down value to 0.5.

     106. Save and Calculate
      Click . The Slot operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

             107. Simulate

              Play the simulation in the SolidVerify mode.

At the final stage of the cover part, you have to perform several operations to machine
the holes located on the bottom face and pads.

     108. Define a Drilling operation
      Define a new Drilling operation for the center drilling of the holes located on the bottom face of the cover.

     109. D efine the Geometry                                                                   to start the

      In the Geometry page, choose the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operation and click
      definition of drill positions.
      The Drill Geometry Selection dialog box is displayed.
      Choose the Multi-positions option in the Select centers by section.

100
                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Click on the bottom model face as shown below.

 All the circular edges located on the selected face are collected, and the drill positions are determined. Confirm
 the geometry selection with  .

110. Define the Tool
 In the Tool page, click the Select button.
 Define a new SPOT DRILL tool with the following parameters.

 Select CAT40 as the adaptor and ER16x70 as the holder.

 Click to confirm the tool for operation.

111. Define the Drilling depth
 In the Milling levels area, set the Drill depth to 0.
 To perform center drilling, use the Depth type option. In the Depth type section, choose the Diameter value
 option and set the value to 5.5 mm.
 The center drilling operation is performed until the specified diameter is reached at the upper level (the top face
 of the model). The upper diameter of the center drilling cone is greater than the drilled hole diameter; this means
 that the 0.25 mm chamfer is performed at the hole edge.

112. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                                                              101
               113. Simulate
               Play the simulation of the center drilling in the SolidVerify mode.

               114. Add a Drilling operation
               In InventorCAM Manager, add a new Drilling operation to drill the holes
               center-drilled at the previous stage.
               Choose the same Drill geometry used in the previous operation.

               115. Define the Tool
               Define a Ø5 Drill tool with following parameters for the operation.

               Select C AT40 as the adaptor and ER 16x701 as the holder.
               116. Define the Drilling depth

               In the Levels page, define the Upper level by clicking on the model upper face.
               Define the Drill depth by clicking on the model face as shown.
               Set the Delta value to -1.
               To perform through drilling, use the Depth type option. In the Depth type
               section, choose the Full diameter option. The drilling is performed until the
               given diameter is reached at the specified Drill depth. This means that the
               conical part of the tool exits from the material.
               117. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.
               118. Simulate
               Play the simulation of the drilling in the SolidVerify mode.
 At the next stage, you have to perform a number of drilling operations (center drilling,
 drilling, tapping) for eight holes located on the pads top faces.

102
                               3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

119. Add a Drilling operation

Add a new Drilling operation to perform the center drilling of the pad holes.

120. Define the Geometry
 In the same manner as explained in Step # 108, define the geometry for the drilling.

 Use the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operation.

121. Define the Tool
 Use the earlier defined Ø6 Spot Drill tool.

122. Define the Drilling depth
 In the Levels page, define the Upper level by clicking on the top face of the pad.

 Set the Drill depth value to 1.
123. Save and Calculate

 Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.
124. Add a Drilling operation

 Add a new Drilling operation to perform the drilling of the pad holes.
 In the Geometry area, choose the drill1 geometry defined in Step #119.

                                                                                                                                              103
               125. Define the Tool
               Define a Ø1.6 Drill tool for the operation with following parameters.
               This tool enables you to perform preliminary drilling for the M2 tapping.

               Select C AT40 as the adaptor and ER 16x702 as holder
               126. Define the Milling levels

               In the Levels page, define the Upper level in the same manner as explained in Step #121.
               Define the Drill depth directly on the solid model. Pick the lower vertex of the hole cone asshown to define the
               depth.

               127. Define the Drill cycle type
               Click the Drill cycle type button in the Technology page. The Drill Cycles
               panel is displayed.
               Choose the Peck type to perform the pecking canned cycle.
               Click the Data button to define the pecking parameters.
               The Drill options dialog box is displayed. Set the Step down value for pecking to 0.5.
               Confirm the dialog box with OK.

               128. Save and Calculate
               Click . The operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

104
                                                                        3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

129. Add a Drilling operation

Add a new Drilling operation to perform the tapping of the pads holes.

In the Geometry area, choose the drill1 geometry defined in Step #119.

Add a new Ø2 Tap tool for the operation.
Select the C AT40 as the adaptor and ER 16x703 as holder.

              Tap Tool
                 This tool is intended for the machining of internal threads in Drilling operations.
                 The tool consists of two parts: cylindrical and conical, and is defined by the following major
                 parameters presented on the illustration.

 Total                         Arbor Diameter
Length
                                  Chamfer Cutting
           Outside                Length Length
           Holder
           Length

                               Tip Diameter

Diameter

                    When the Tap tool is used in the operation, the Tapping drill cycle is chosen
                    automatically.

130. Define the Drilling depth
 In the Levels page, define the Upper level in the same manner as explained in Step #1 21.
 Set the Drill depth to 4.

                                                                                            105
               131. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Drilling operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

               132. Simulate
               Click . The Simulation control panel is displayed.
               InventorCAM enables you to simulate several operations together. Holding
               the Shift key, select the last three operations in InventorCAM Manager (center
               drilling, drilling and tapping of the pad holes) and play the simulation.

 At this stage, programming of the machining operations is completed. Now you have to
 generate the GCode to send it to the CNC-machine controller.

               133. Generate the GCode
               I nventorCAM enables you to generate the GCode for several operations or for the complete CAM-Part.
               Right-click the Operations header in InventorCAM Manager and choose the Generate command from the GCode
               All submenu.

               The GCode is generated for the complete CAM-Part. The generated GCode is displayed in the Notepad window.

 At this stage, the exercise is completed.

106
                                                                            3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Exercise #4: Bracket Machining

Define the CAM-Part and operations for the machining of the bracket presented
on the illustration on a Milling CNC-machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
   · CAM-Part definition
   · Face milling
   · Pocket machining
   · Profile machining
   · Drilling

The Autodesk Inventormodel of the Bracket (Exercise4.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Define the CAM-Part

 At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller, Machine Coordinate System, the Stock and
 Target models.

 The gMilling_3xCNC-controller has to be chosen for this exercise.

2. Machine the top face
 Define a Face Milling operation to machine the top face of the bracket.

3. Machine the side faces
 Perform the Profile rough and finish machining of the bracket side faces.

4. Machine the open pockets
 Define a Profile operation to perform the machining of the open areas as shown.

5. Machine the pocket
 Define a Pocket operation to perform rough and finish machining of the pocket
 located on the top face of the bracket.

                                                                                                                                              107
               6. Pre-machine the cylindrical hole
               Define two Drilling operations to perform the center drilling and preliminary
               drilling for the further pocket operation.

               7. Machine the cylindrical hole
               Perform two Pocket operations to machine the faces of the through hole.
               Use the pre-drilled hole to perform the safe lead in movement of the tool into
               the material.

               8. Machine the holes
               Perform center drilling and drilling of the holes.

               9. Machine the bottom face
               Define a Face Milling operation to machine the bottom face of the bracket.
               This operation requires different clamping, so define and use a new Coordinate
               System with the Z-axis oriented normally to the bottom face.

108
                                       3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Exercise #5: Electronic Box Machining

Define the CAM-Part and operations for machining of the electronic box
presented on the illustration on Milling CNC-machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
   · CAM-Part definition
   · Face milling
   · Pocket machining
   · Profile machining
   · Rest material machining
   · Drilling

The Autodesk Inventormodel of the Electronic Box (Exercise5.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Define the CAM-Part

 At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (gMilling_3x), Machine Coordinate System, the
 Stock and Target models.

2. Machine the top face
 Define a Face Milling operation to machine the top face of the electronic box part with the Hatch strategy.

3. Machine the side faces
 Define two Profile operations to perform rough machining of the external faces.

                                                                                                              109
               4. Machine the pocket
               Define two Pocket operations to perform rough machining of the internal pocket faces with a tool of large
               diameter.

               5. Perform the pocket finish machining
               Define a number of Pocket operations to perform finish machining of the internal pocket faces. Choose the Tool
               according to the minimal radius of the model fillets.

               During the wall finish machining, use the Rest Material strategy to remove the bulk of material in the corners.

               6. Perform finish machining of the external faces
               At the first stage, perform the rest material machining of the corner faces to remove the bulk of the material.

110
                                                                      3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Define a number of Profile operations to machine the external faces.

7. Machine the holes
 Define a number of Drilling operations to perform the center
 drilling, drilling, and tapping of the holes. Use a Pocket operation
 for counterboring of the holes.

8. Machine the bottom face
 Define a Face Milling operation to machine the bottom face of the
 electronic box part using the Hatch strategy.
 This operation requires different clamping, so define and use a new Coordinate System with the Z-axis oriented
 normally to the bottom face.

                                                                      111
 Exercise #6: Clamp Machining

 Define the CAM-Part and operations for the machining of the clamp part
 presented on the illustration on a Milling CNC-machine.
 This exercise reinforces the following skills:

     · CAM-Part definition
     · Multi-sided machining using 2.5-axis CNC-machine
     · Profile machining
     · Open pocket machining
     · Drilling
 The Autodesk Inventormodel of the Clamp (Exercise6.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.
 The following steps have to be implemented in order to obtain the final CAM-Part:

               1. Define the CAM-Part
               At this stage you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (gMilling_3x),
               Machine Coordinate System, the Stock and Target models.
               Make a note that the workpiece used for this part is the box exactly surrounding the
               clamp model without an offset.

               2. Holes machining
               Perform a number of Drilling operations to machine the holes.
               Use the appropriate Machine Coordinate System defined for the positioning
               shown below.

112
                          3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

3. Open pocket machining

Add a Machine Coordinate System for the positioning shown below to
machine the open pocket.

Add a new Pocket operation. In this operation, the open pocket machining strategy will be used.
Select the open pocket geometry chain as shown.

Click  to confirm the selected chain. The Close Chain dialog box is displayed.

              Close Chain dialog box
                 This dialog box is displayed when you confirm an open chain definition in the Geometry Edit
                 dialog box.
                 When you confirm this dialog box with the Yes button, the chain is closed with a line that connects
                 the start and the end points of the chain. The Mark line as open edge check box enables you to
                 mark the connecting line as open edge to perform open pocket machining.
                 When you click the No button, InventorCAM returns to the geometry definition and enables you
                 to close the chain manually by the model element selection.

                                                                                                                                            113
               Select the Mark line as open edge check box and confirm the dialog boxwith OK.

               The open edge is marked.

               Confirm the Geometry Edit dialog box by clicking  .

               Choose the Ø6 End mill for the operation.

               Select the upper face of the model as the Upper level and the pocket floor as
               the Pocket depth.

               In the Technology page, choose the Contour machining strategy. Switch to
               the Open pocket tab to define the parameters of the open pocket machining.
               The open pocket extension can also be user-defined as tangent angle from the wall. Define the extension of the
               tool path beyond the open edge.

               Select the Use profile strategy check box.

                               Use Profile Strategy

                                This option enables you to perform the open pocket machining in a
                                Profile manner. The tool path at a specific Z-level consists of several
                                equidistant profiles starting from outside the model at the distance
                                defined by the Extension parameter. The tool moves on offsets parallel
                                to the pocket geometry.

                                The following options enable you to define the tool path direction and
                                linking.

                                · When the One way option is chosen, the tool finishes one profile
                                    pass, then rapidly moves (G0) to the safety distance and then to the
                                    start of the next cutting pass. The cutting direction (either climb or
                                    conventional) is preserved for each cutting pass.

                                · When the Zigzag option is chosen, the tool finishes one profile pass
                                    and then moves directly to the next pass. The machining is performed
                                    without leaving the material, thus constantly switching between climb
                                    and conventional milling.

               Use the default One way option.

               Select the Approach from outside check box.

                               Approach from outside

                                This option enables the tool to approach from outside of
                                the material in the open pocket areas, if possible. Such
                                approach enables you to decrease the tool loading when
                                plunging into the material. This option enables you to
                                perform the approach movement from the automatically
                                calculated point outside of the material. The tool moves
                                to the required depth outside of the material and then
                                plunges into the material.

114
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 Switch back to the Technology tab. In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset and the Floor offset to 0.2. To
 remove these offsets with the finishing cut, select the Wall and Floor check boxes in the Finish section.
4. Hole machining
 Define two Drilling operations to perform center drilling and drilling of the
 hole located at the bottom of the open pocket. Use the same Machine
 Coordinate System (positioning) as in the previous operation.

5. Step machining
 Define a Profile operation to machine the step.
 Define the Machine Coordinate System for the positioning shown below.

 Use the Point to point option in the Geometry Edit dialog box to define the geometry.
                Point to Point mode
                  This option enables you to connect the specified points. The points are connected by a straight
                  line. This option is useful when it is impossible to define the geometry using the model edges.

                  In this exercise, it is impossible to define the straight geometry for the Profile Milling using the
                  model edges. The Point to point option enables you to define the geometry by two points located
                  on the model vertices.
 Use the Zigzag method for Depth cutting type to connect the successive Z-level passes directly from the end of
 a pass to the beginning of the next pass.

                                                                                                                                              115
                               Depth cutting type
                                When the One way option is chosen, the cutting passes are oriented in
                                the same direction, and the connection between them is performed
                                through the Operation Clearance level. At the end of each pass the
                                tool performs a retreat movement to the Operation Clearance level, a
                                horizontal movement at rapid feed to the start point of the next pass
                                and then descends to the Z-level of the next pass. The same cutting
                                direction (climb or conventional) is kept along the whole tool path.
                                When the Zigzag option is chosen, the tool path is performed in a
                                zigzag manner, with the tool path direction changing from one pass to
                                the next. The passes located at two successive Z-levels are connected
                                directly from the end of one pass to the beginning of the next pass.
                                                   The Zigzag option cannot be used together with the
                                                   Clear offset technology.

116
                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Exercise #7: Basic Part Machining

Define the CAM-Part and operations for the machining of the basic part
presented on the illustration on a Milling CNC-machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
   · CAM-Part definition
   · Pocket machining
   · Profile machining
   · Rest material machining
   · Face milling
   · Drilling

The Autodesk Inventor model of the Basic part (Exercise7.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Define the CAM-Part

 At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (gMilling_3x), Machine Coordinate System, the
 Stock and Target models.

2. Upper cusp machining

 Define two Profile operations to remove the bulk of material and perform the rough and the finish machining of
 the cusp.

3. Step machining
 Perform the rough and finish machining of the step faces using the Profile operation.

                                                                                                   117
               4. External contour machining
               Define a Profile operation to perform the rough and finish machining of the
               external model faces.

               5. Connector opening machining
               Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the connector
               opening faces.

               6. Connector pocket machining
               Define a number of Pocket and Profile operations to perform the roughing and
               finishing of the connector pocket.

               7. Connector opening finish machining
               Use the Pocket rest material strategy to perform the finish machining of the
               connector opening faces.

               8. Machine screw head areas
               Define a Profile operation to perform the rough and finish machining of the
               screw head areas.

               9. Top face machining
               Use the Face milling Hatch strategy to perform the rough and finish machining
               of the top face.

118
                           3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

10. Bottom face machining

Use the Face milling Hatch strategy to perform the rough and finish machining
of the bottom face of the Cover part.

Note that this operation and the following ones use a new positioning and
therefore you have to define a new Machine Coordinate System.

11. Pocket rough machining
 Use a Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the highlighted faces.

12. Wall finish machining
 Define two Profile operations to perform the finish machining of the wall faces
 of the pockets.

13. Bottom pocket machining
 Perform the rough and finish machining of the bottom pocket with the island.

14. Hole machining
 Define a number of Drilling operations to machine holes located on the cover
 part faces.

                                                                                  119
Exercise #8: Cover Machining

Machine the hole and chamfer on the pre-machined cover part presented on the illustration
on a Milling CNC-machine.
This exercise reinforces the following skills:

   · 3D contour machining

The part file (Exercise8.prz) is located in the Exercises folder. This file contains the defined CAM-Part. The model used for
the part definition contains two iPart members: Default (model with the hole and chamfer features) and Stock (hole and
chamfer features suppressed).

Default  Stock

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Open the CAM-Part
 Open the Exercise8.prz file located in the Exercises folder.

2. Add a Contour 3D operation

 Add a new Contour 3D operation to perform machining of the hole on the upper face of the part.

 The Contour 3D Operation dialog box is displayed.

                  A through hole located on a convex surface can be machined in several methods, such as Profile
                  machining and Contour 3D machining. Profile milling used for machining of such holes results in
                  a great number of tool path passes with unavoidable air cutting, because it yields a planar tool path
                  parallel to the XY-plane. Contour 3D machining
                  enables you to generate a curved tool path in three-
                  dimensional space. Therefore, in this exercise the
                  Contour 3D operation is used for hole machining to
                  optimize the tool path and avoid redundant tool
                  movements.

                                                                                                                               Profile Machining

                                                                                                                                               Profile 3D Machining

120
                                                                    3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

3. Define the Geometry
 Define the geometry chain on the upper edge of the hole as shown.

4. Define the Tool
 Add a new Ø10 End mill tool for the operation.

5. Define thetechnological parameters
 In the Modify section, click the Geometry button to check the
 position of the tool relative to the geometry.
 In this case, the default Left option set for Tool side meets the
 requirements of the climb milling. Close the Modify Geometry dialog
 box by clicking  .
 In the Offsets section, set the Wall offset value to 0.2. The allowance
 of 0.2 mm will be left on the hole wall during the roughing. This
 allowance will be removed with a separate finishing cut in the end
 of the machining.
 Select the Rough check box. Set the Step down to 2. The hole will be machined in three equidistant rough passes.
 Select the Finish check box. Set the Step down to 6. The finishing will be performed in a single pass.

6. Define the Lead in and Lead out
 For Lead in, choose the Arc option and use the default Radius value of 2. For Lead out, select the Same as Lead
 in check box.

7. Simulate the operation
 Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

                                                                                                                                              121
     8. Add a Contour 3D operation
      Add a new Contour 3D operation to perform chamfering of the upper face of the cover.

     9. Define the Geometry
      Define the geometry chain on the upper edge of the face as shown.

     10. Define the Tool
      Add a new Ø10 Spot drill tool for the operation.

     11. Define the Milling levels
      In the Levels page, set Depth to 0.

     12. Define the technological parameters

      In the Modify section of the Technology page, set the Tool side to
      Right. Click the Geometry button to check the tool position relative
      to the geometry.

      Close the Modify Geometry dialog box by clicking  .

      Select the Rough check box. Set the Step down to 0.

      In the Chamfer section, select the check box and switch to the
      Chamfer tab.

      Set the Cutting diameter value to 2.

                                                                            Cutting         Profile depth
                                                                            Diameter        (Chamfer depth)

     13. Define the Lead in and Lead out
      For Lead in, choose the Arc option and use the default Radius value of 2. For Lead out, select the Same as Lead
      in check box.

     14. Simulate the operation
      Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

122
                                                                          3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Exercise #9: Mounting Base Machining

Define the CAM-Part and operations for the machining of the mounting base presented
on the illustration on a Milling CNC-machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
   · CAM-Part definition
   · Pocket machining
   · Drafted profile machining
   · T-slot milling
   · Drilling

The Autodesk Inventormodel of the Mounting base (Exercise9.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.

The following steps have to be implemented in order to obtain the final CAM-Part:

1. Define the CAM-Part

 At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (gMilling_3x), Machine Coordinate System, the
 Stock and Target models.

2. Contour machining
 Define a Profile operation to machine the mounting base external faces.

3. Top face machining
 Define a Face Milling operation to machine the top face of the mounting base.

4. Pocket machining
 Define a Pocket operation to perform rough and finish machining of the pocket
 faces.

       Use the lower edges of the islands for the internal chains definition, because
       the walls are drafted.
       Use a Bull nose tool of Ø8 with Corner radius of 0.2 mm for machining of the pocket.

                                                                                                     123
               5. Profile machining for islands
               Define a Profile operation for two draft angled walls of the islands. Use the Bull nose tool of Ø8 already defined
               in Step #4.
               Define the geometry as shown.
               Select the Finish option in the Technology page and set the Step
               down value to 0.1.
               Switch to the Advanced tab and click the Wall draft angle button.
                               Wall Draft Angle
                                When this check box is selected, the inclined wall
                                machining is performed.

                                        · External wall angle

                                    This parameter defines the draft angle of the wall measured from the Z-axis direction as shown.
                                    For the inclined wall machining, each cutting pass located at a specific Z-level is generated
                                    according to the specified External wall angle value.

                                        · External corner type

                                    This option enables you to define how the cutting passes are connected during the external
                                    corners machining. There are three ways to connect between the cutting passes:
                                    Sharp corner: the tool path is calculated to perform the machining of a sharp corner. This
                                    option affects only the machining of geometry sharp corners.

124
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
                      Conical fillet: the tool path is calculated to perform the machining of the corner with a conical
                      fillet; the radius of the tool path rounding increases from one pass to the next. This option
                      affects only the machining of sharp geometry corners.

                      Cylindrical fillet: this option affects the machining of both of sharp and filleted corners of the
                      geometry. The machining of sharp corners is performed similar to the Conical fillet option. For
                      the filleted corners, the tool path is calculated to perform the machining of the corner with a
                      cylindrical fillet; the radius of the tool path rounding is the same for all the cutting passes.

 In the new dialog box, check the Wall draft angle option.
 Set the External wall angle to 8.
 In the Cut from area, select the Bottom to top option.
6. T-Slot machining
 In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Operations header
 and choose T-Slot Operation from the Add Milling Operation
 submenu.
 The T-Slot Operation dialog box is displayed.
 Define two geometry chains as shown. Make sure the direction of the chains geometry is the same as on the
 illustration.

 Add a new Slot mill tool.

                                                                                                                                              125
     Slot Mill

        This type of tool can be used for all types of machining from simple 2.5D undercuts up to 5-axis
        simultaneous machining.

        A tool of this type is defined with the parameters shown in the image.

                                                Arbor
                                              Diameter

      Total                   Outside
     Length                   Holder

     Corner Radius  Diameter  Cutting
                              Length

     Edit the tool parameters as follows:
          · Set Diameter to 36
          · Set Corner radius to 0
          · Set Cutting length to 3

     Add the BT40 ER32x80 tool holder.

     Confirm the tool definition by clicking .
     In the Tool page, click the Data tab.
     Select the Offsets option and the Top tool offset number check box.

     The Length offset number defines the length offset register of the current tool in the Offset table
     of the CNC-machine. The Top tool offset number defines the register number of the upper cutting
     edge of the T-slot mill. This option enables InventorCAM to automatically take into account the
     minor size differences between the defined tool and the one actually used for cutting the workpiece,
     if there are any.

     7. Define theMilling levels
      Define the Ceiling (Upper level) for slot machining by clicking on the model face as shown.
      Confirm the value (-4.5) in the Pick Upper level dialog box.

126
                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Define the Depth of the T-slot by clicking on the model as shown.

 The depth value calculated in the Depth area is 6.
8. Define the technological parameters

 Define the rough parameters in the Technology page. To perform roughing of the slot, select the Rough check
 box.
 To perform the rough machining of the slot, you have to specify offsets on the slot geometry. These offsets are
 removed with the finishing cut.

                  The Wall offset option defines the offset that remains on the slot wall after roughing.

                               Wall O set

                  The Ceiling offset option defines the offset that remains on the slot ceiling after roughing.

                                                                          Ceiling
                                                                          Offset

                  The Floor offset option defines the offset that remains on the slot floor after roughing.

                                                                          Floor
                                                                          Offset

                                                                                                                                              127
     Set all of the offsets to 0.2

     Define the finishing parameters.

     Select the Finish check box. Notice that the Ceiling, Wall and Floor check boxes are selected by default. These
     check boxes define the offsets (Ceiling, Wall and Floor, respectively) to be removed with the finishing pass. Set
     the Cutting depth overlap value for finishing to 2.

     Cutting depth overlap

        This parameter defines the overlap of each two adjacent tool paths in both rough and finish
        machining of the slot.

     Cutting depth  Cutting depth
     overlap        overlap

     9. Define the Lead in and Lead out
      For Lead in, select the Tangent option and set the Tangent extension to 12. For Lead out, select the Same as Lead
      in check box.

     10. Simulate the operation
      Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

     11. Holes machining
      Define several Drilling operations to perform the machining of the
      countersink holes located on the top face of the mounting plate.

128
                                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

Exercise #10: Support Machining

Machine the threads on the pre-machined support part presented on the
illustration on a Milling CNC-machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
   · Threading
   · Creating shaped tools

The part file (Exercise10.prz) is located in the Exercises folder. This file contains
the defined CAM-Part.

The following steps have to be implemented in order to perform the internal and external threading:

1. Open the CAM-Part
 Open the Exercise10.prz file located in the Exercises folder.

2. Add a Thread Milling Operation
 Add a new Thread Milling operation to perform threading of the internal surface of the part.
 The Thread Milling Operation dialog box is displayed.

3. Define the Geometry

 Define the geometry by clicking on the internal surface of the part.

 The tread milling position is selected, and its coordinates are displayed in the
 Drill Geometry Selection dialog box.

4. Define the Tool
 Switch to the Tool page of the Thread Milling Operation dialog box and click the Select button.
 The available tools are displayed in the TOOLKIT.
 Choose the Thread Mill tool for the operation.

                                                                                                     129
Thread Mill

   This tool type is used for threading in Thread Milling operations. A tool of this type is defined with
   the parameters shown in the image.

                              Arbor
                            Diameter

Outside                     Total
Holder                     Length
Length

Shoulder
 Length

         Cutting Diameter  Thread
                           Cutting
                           Length

In the Tool Parameters section, select the Metric (ISO) option from the list.

The Threading Type: Metric (ISO) dialog box is displayed.
Select the M64 x 4.0 standard from the list and click OK.

               Define the tool parameters as shown in the image.

               Click to select the tool for the operation.
               The tool is displayed in the illustration area. This picture is generic;
               it does not reflect the specified parameters.
               You can edit its appearance by adding a shaped tool to the Tool
               Library.

130
                                                 3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

 Click the Select button.

5. Add a Shaped tool
 In the Shape Type list, select Sketch (2D).
 The editing box for shaped tools is displayed.

You can see in the above image that three cylinders are already defined by default. You must add some cone
shapes below cylinder 1.
Right click Cylinder 1 > Add shape below and select the cone shape as
shown in the image.
The Cons1 page is added.

Edit the cone dimensions as follows:
     · Select Top diameter and click the small box that highlights

     · Click Edit.

                                                                                                                                            131
                     · Set the Top diameter to 20 and click OK.
                     · Choose the Auto-calculate option for the Bottom diameter
                     · Set the Height value to 2 in the same manner you edited the top

                        diameter value.
                     · Set the Angle to 120 in the same manner you edited the top diameter value.
               The Bottom diameter is calculated automatically and set to 13.0718.
               Right-click Cons1 > Add shape above and select the same cone shape you
               used for adding the first cone. Edit its dimensions as follows:
                     · Choose the Auto-calculate option for the Top diameter
                     · Set the Bottom diameter to 20
                     · Set the Height value to 2
                     · Set the Angle to -120
               Repeat these steps six more times until you have defined total eight cones. For cone 3, 5, and 7 use the same
               parameters as were defined for cone 1. for cone 4, 6,and 8 use the parameters that were defined for cone 2.
               In the same manner as described above, edit the values of Cylinder1 and Cylinder2 with the following parameters:
                     · For Cylinder1, set the Diameter to 12 and the Height to 50
                     · For Cylinder2, set the Diameter to 16 and the Height to 30
                     · Right click Cylinder3 and delete it as it is not required
               The final tool shape is as shown on the picture.

               Confirm the new shaped tool by clicking
               The new tool shape is now displayed in the tool picture section and visible during simulation.

               6. Define the Milling levels
               Define the operation Upper level directly on the solid model by clicking on the top of the part.
               Define the Thread depth by clicking on the bottom face of the part.
               In the Depth definition area, set the Delta value to -4.

132
                                        3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

7. Define the technological parameters

In the Technology page, make sure the default Internal type is chosen in the Thread Data area. Set the Major thread
diameter value to 64. In the Cut from section, select Top to bottom. When the Compensation check box is
selected, the tool radius compensation options G4x of the CNC-controller are used in the GCode.

8. Define the Lead in
 Switch to the Link page. Under Lead in/out arc, clear the Start from the center check box.
                Start from the center
                  This option enables you to start threading from the center of the
                  geometry. When this option is cleared, the tool starts machining from a
                  safety distance,which allows to avoidaircuttingandsavemachiningtime.

 Set other parameters as shown in the image.

9. Simulate the operation
 Perform the simulation of the operation in the Host CAD mode. Set the
 CAM-Part in the Top view to observe that the tool approaches the material
 not in the center.

                                                                                                                                              133
               Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

               10. Add a Thread Milling Operation
               Add a new Thread Milling operation to perform smallinternal threads.

               11. Define the Geometry
               Define the geometry by clicking on the upper surface of the model containing the holes.

               12. Define the Tool
               Define a new Thread mill selecting the M14x1.5 standard from the Metric (ISO) table.

               13. Define the Milling levels
               Define the operation Upper level directly on the solid model by clicking on the small pocket surface as shown.

               Define the Thread depth by clicking on the model bottom face.

134
                                         3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

14. Define the technological parameters

In the Technology page, make sure the default Internal type is chosen in the Thread data area. Set the Major thread
diameter value to 14. In the Cut from section, select Top to bottom.

15. Define the Lead in
 Switch to the Link page. Under Lead in/out arc, make sure that the Start from the center check box is selected.
 Set the other parameters as shown in the image.

16. Simulate the operation
 Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

17. Add a Thread Milling operation
 Add a new Thread Milling operation to perform threading of the external surface of the part.

                                                                                                                                              135
               18. Define the Geometry
               Use the drill geometry defined in the first operation.

               19. Define the Tool
               Define a new Thread mill.
               In the Tool parameters area, select User and set 4 as the value.
                     · Set the Cutting diameter to 20
                     · Set the Number of teeth to 4
                     · Set the Arbor diameter to 16
                     · Set the Total length, Outside holder, and Shoulder length to 86
                     · Set the Thread cutting length to 16
               Add a new shaped tool with a shorter shaft, defining the Cylinder1 height as 40 mm.

               20. Define the Milling levels
               Define the operation Upper level directly on the solid model by clicking on the top face of the part as shown.

               Define the Thread depth by clicking on the model surface as shown below.

136
                                                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

             21. Define the technological parameters
              In the Technology page, choose the External type in the
              Thread data area. Set the Nominal value to 86.
              In the Cut from area, choose the Top to bottom option.

             22. Define the Lead in
              Switch to the Link page. Set the parameters as shown in the
              image.Under Lead in/out arc, set the Arc radius value to 2.

             23. Save and Calculate
              Click . The Threading operation data is saved, and the
              tool path is calculated.

             24. Simulate the operation
              Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

At this stage, the exercise is completed.

                                                                                137
 Exercise #11: Engraving

 This exercise demonstrates the use of engraving with the text carved on the solid model
 or typed in using a computer keyboard.
 This exercise reinforces the following skill:

     · Engraving
 The part file (Exercise11.prz) is located in the Exercises folder. This file contains the
 defined CAM-Part.
 The following steps have to be implemented in order to perform text engraving:

               1. Open the CAM-Part
               Open the Exercise11.prz file located in the Exercises folder.

               2. Add an Engraving Operation
               Add a new Engraving operation to perform machining of the inscription on the upper face of the part.
               The Engraving Operation dialog box is displayed. Make sure that the default 2D Engraving technology is selected.

               3. Define the Geometry
               The geometry for this operation is a set of closed chains comprising the letters.
               Click in the Geometry page. Click the Add button in the Multi-chain section. The
               Chains Selection dialog box is displayed.

138
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 In the Type section, choose the Faces option. All chains found on the selected face will be added to the geometry.
 To exclude from the geometry the external chain formed by the face edges, apply a filter. Choose the Loops filter
 option. Clear the check box near the External loops option. Now only letters will be included in the geometry.
 Click on the face that contains the letter. The face is highlighted.

 Click  to choose the selected chains as the geometry. The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.
 Zoom in the selected face. Some letters consist of two chains, internal and external, and the internal chains are
 not selected automatically.

 In the Geometry Edit dialog box, select the Constant Z Propagation option from the Chain section. Click on the
 internal chain of the letter "o". Accept closing the open chain. The internal chain is added to the geometry.

 Select again the Constant Z Propagation option from the Chain section. Click on the internal chain of the letter
 "d". Accept closing the open chain. Repeat the same steps with all letters that include internal chains: "o," "d,"
 "A," "D," and "R."
 Confirm the geometry definition with  .
4. Define the Tool
 Switch to the Tool page of the Engraving Operation dialog box and click the Select button.
 Choose the Engraving tool for the operation.

                                                                                                                                              139
Engraving tool

   This tool type is used for engraving. A tool of this type is defined with the parameters shown in
   the image.

    Arbor Diameter

                                                        Total

                                                        Length

Diameter                                       Outside

                                               Holder

                                       Shoulder Length

                                       Length

Cutting                                Angle
Length

Tip Diameter                           Corner Radius

An Engraving tool of Ø6 will be used.
Edit the following tool parameters:

     · Set the Tip diameter to 0.1
     · Set the Taper angle to 15

               Click to edit the tool data:
                     · Set the Feed XY to 1000
                     · Set the Feed Z to 300
                     · Set the Spin rate to 5000

               5. Define the Milling levels
               Define the Upper level directly on the part surface. Define the Engraving depth on the floor of the engraved text.

140
                                                                3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations

6. Define the technological parameters
 Switch to the Technology page.
 In the Modify section, choose Left in the Tool side list.
 Select the Fill area option and choose Contour from the list.

Fill area

    Hatch

       When this option is chosen, the tool moves inside the closed contour in linear movements.

    Contour

       When this option is chosen, the tool moves on offsets parallel to the geometry contour. The
       distance between two consecutive cuts is defined by the Step over value.

    Middle line only

       When this option is chosen, the tool moves along the center line of the closed contour. When
       this option is selected, the Tool side is always set as Center. Selecting the V-Carving check box,
       creates a 3D tool path from 2D fonts. This also sets the Min. contact angle to 60. Set the Min.
       contact angle to 60 or less for improved results. When V-Carving check box is enabled, the
       Engraving depth on the Levels page is set to 0 and locked from editing because the depth
       varies. The varying depth, which is the result of the operation maintaining the font appearance
       on the engraving surface, is determined automatically by the tool tip geometry and width of
       the font.

Set the Step over value to 0.05.
The default Floor finish option enables you to perform finishing on the bottom of the engraved text.

7. Save and Calculate
 Click . The Engraving operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

                                                                                                                                              141
     8. Simulate the operation
      Perform the simulation of the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

     9. Add an Engraving Operation
      Add another Engraving operation.

     10. Define the Geometry
      The geometry for this operation is the text typed in directly from your keyboard.

     Click  in the Geometry page. In the Geometry Edit dialog box, click the Add button in the Text section.

     In the Text definition dialog box, click the Edit button in the Text definition section. The
     Draw Tools dialog box is displayed. Click the text symbol and draw a rectangle to
     define a text frame.

     Type in the text that you want to engrave, for example "InventorCAM 2024." Use the
     toolbar icons to change the text properties: font, size, alignment, and so on.

     Click to confirm the text.

142
                                                                                                   3. InventorCAM 2.5D Operations
 In the Reference point section, click the Pick point button. Select the reference point directly on the model,
 clicking the point in the beginning of the sketch line.

 The point coordinates are displayed in the Pick reference point dialog box. Confirm the point selection by
 clicking  . The coordinates of left bottom corner of the engraved text frame will be in this point.
 Click the Preview button to see how the text fits the available space. InventorCAM creates a number of chains
 on the model surface.

 Click Resume and accept the chains by clicking  . The Geometry Edit dialog box is displayed.
 The Chain List section contains the Text item which includes all selected chains. This
 item can be edited and modified every time you need to make a change.
 Click  to choose the selected geometry for the operation.
11. Define the Tool
 Use the same Engraving tool of Ø6 as in the previous operation.
12. Define the Milling levels
 Set the Engraving depth value to 0.2.
13. Define the technological parameters
 Switch to the Technology page.
 In the Modify section, choose Center in the Tool side list. The tool tip will be positioned exactly on the geometry.

                                                                                                                                              143
               14. Save and Calculate
               Click . The Engraving operation data is saved, and the tool path is calculated.

               15. Simulate the operation
               Perform the simulation of both the operations in the SolidVerify mode.

 At this stage, the exercise is completed.

144
4 Indexial 4-Axis Milling
InventorCAM enables you to perform indexial 4-axis milling on vertical or horizontal CNC-machines with a 4th axis rotary
table.

The 4th axis rotation is used for the positioning of the part. When the part is positioned to the required orientation, the 4th
axis is locked and the machining is performed using 3-axis movements.

For each clamping, InventorCAM enables you to define the Machine Coordinate System with X-axis (for vertical machines)
or Y-axis (for horizontal machines) parallel to the revolution axis of the rotary table.

         Machine     Machine
         Coordinate  Coordinate Y
     Z System        System X

             Y                      Z

           X

Within one clamping (Machine Coordinate System), InventorCAM enables you to define a number of positions around the
revolution axis. For vertical machines the X-axis of these positions is parallel to the X-axis of the Machine Coordinate
System.

                         Machine Coordinate System

                                     ZY      Z
                                                 Y
                                          X     X

                       Positions

     Z
        Y
                                   ZY
        X
                                       X

146
                                                                                                                              4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

For horizontal machines, the Y-axis of these positions is parallel to the Y-axis of the Machine Coordinate System.

                              Machine Coordinate System

                        X  Y        Z

         Y                 Positions                       Y
                                    Y

X           Z              X           Z                X     Z

For each position, InventorCAM automatically determines the Shift and the Rotation parameters relative to the Machine
Coordinate System.

               Machine                                                  Rotation X
               Coordinate
               System                                      Z     Y'

            ZY                                      Z'               Y
                 X
                              Y'

                                          Position

                              Z' X'

Shift Z        Shift X                                            X
                                                                 X'
                           Shift Y

The Shift components (Shift X, Shift Y and Shift Z) describe the shifting of the position relative to the Machine Coordinate
System.

The Rotation components (Rotation around X, Rotation around Y and Rotation around Z) describe the axis orientation of the
position relative to the Machine Coordinate System.

Positions can be defined only around the revolution axis. For vertical machines only positions around X-axis can be added,
so the Rotation around Y and Rotation around Z values are 0. The Rotation around X parameter can be different from 0. For
horizontal machines only positions around Y-axis can be added, so the Rotation around X and Rotation around Z values are
0. The Rotation around Y parameter can be different from 0.

Machine Coordinate Systems and their positions are used for the geometry definition. Before the geometry definition you
have to choose the Coordinate System position. The geometry has to be located in the plane parallel to the XY-plane of the
chosen CoordSys.

                                                                                    147
 Exercise #12: Frame Machining

 In this exercise, indexial 4-axis operations are used for the frame part machining.
 The frame is machined from the pre-machined stock on a vertical 4-axis milling CNC-machine using a special jig.

 The jig with the clamped workpiece is placed on the rotary table of the machine. Such clamping enables you to machine four
 sides of the model using the rotation of the 4th axis.

                            The tail used for the part clamping is removed in a separate operation using
                            a 3-axis CNC-machine.
                1. Load the Autodesk Inventor model
                Load the Exercise12.ipt model located in the Exercises folder.
                The model contains three iPart members:

                         Default

                       The original design model without changes.

148
                                                                      4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

Stock

  The stock model that is used for the InventorCAM stock definition.

Machining

  The machining model with a tail that was not removed. This configuration is used for the InventorCAM
      geometries definition. You can switch between these iPart members by double-clicking their subheaders
      under the Table header of the Model elements tree.

2. Start a new project
To start a new project, click the InventorCAM 2024 in the main menu of Autodesk Inventors and choose Milling
from the New submenu. The Milling Part Data dialog box is displayed.

3. Define the CNC-controller
Choose a CNC-machine controller. Click the arrow in the CNC-Machine section to display the list of post-
processors installed on your system.
In this exercise, choose the gMilling_3x CNC-controller from the list.

4. Define the Machine Coordinate System
Click the CoordSys button in the Define section of the Milling Part Data dialog box to
start the Coordinate System definition.
The CoordSys dialog box is displayed.
InventorCAM assigns the first Position number to the Machine Coordinate System by
default.

                                                                      149
                Make sure that the Select face option is chosen. Select the Top corner of model box option in the Place CoordSys
                origin to list.
                Click on the model bottom face as shown.

                Now click on Pick origin in the Modify by pick section.
                Click on the point on the corner of model as shown.

                The Machine Coordinate System #1 is now defined in the top corner of the model box. Click .
                The CoordSys Data dialog box is displayed.

                InventorCAM automatically determines the Shift and Rotation values. For the first
                Position related to a new Machine Coordinate System, the Shift and Rotation parameters
                values are always 0.
                Close this dialog box with .
                The CoordSys Manager dialog box is displayed.
                5. Define the CoordSys positions
                Now you have to define several additional Positions around the Machine Coordinate
                System #1.
150
                                                                      4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

In CoordSys Manager, click the Add button.
The CoordSys dialog box is displayed again.
InventorCAM assigns the next sequential number to the position.
Click on the model face as shown.

The origin is automatically placed in the top corner of the model. The Z-axis is directed outwards normally to
the selected face. The X-axis direction is the same as the direction of the X-axis of the Machine Coordinate
System (Position #1).

Now click on Pick origin in the Modify by pick section.

Click on the point on the corner of model as shown.

Click to confirm the position location. The CoordSys Data dialog box is displayed.

The Part Upper level (0) and the Part Lower level (-100) are automatically determined on
the model.

The Shift and Rotation parameters are defined automatically for the Position #2. The Shift

Z is -35; the Shift X and Shift Y are 0. The Rotation around X is -90; other Rotation values

are 0.                         Machine Coordinate System

Confirm the dialog box with .                 Z Position #1

                                                                 Y

                               Rotation X     Shift Z             X
                                   -90°         35     Y

                                                         Position #2

                                           Z           X

                                                                                              151
     In the same manner, define Position #3 and Position #4 using the model faces as shown.

     Position #3                                      Position #4

     Shift (0,100,-35)                                Shift (0,100,0)

     Rotation (180,0,0)                               Rotation (90,0,0)

     Confirm the CoordSys Manager dialog box with .
     Confirm the Milling Part Data dialog box with .

     6. Define the Stock model

     Switch from InventorCAM Manager to the Model tab. Switch to the Stock iPart member. Expand the Table
     component and double-click the Stock item in the list of the iPart members. The model is displayed in the
     configuration ready for the stock definition.

     Right click the Stock > Define. The Stock dialog box is displayed.

     In the Defined by list, select the 3D Model option. This option enables you to define the stock model by picking
     solid bodies. Click on the model to select it for the stock model. Close the Model dialog box with

152
                                                                                                             4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling
7. Define the Target model
In the Model elements tree, double-click on the Machining iPart member that describes
the model after the machining. The model is changed.

Right click the Target > Define. The Target dialog box is displayed.
Click on the model to select it. Set the Facet tolerance value to 0.01.
Close the Target dialog box with .
Click the InventorCAM Manager tab.
8. Define the Fixture
InventorCAM enables you to define the Part fixtures such as clamps, vises, jig plates, etc. This feature allows
you to get a more realistic picture during the simulation and check possible collisions between the cutting tools
and fixtures.
At first, you have to add the model of the clamping device to the CAM-Part assembly.

            It is recommended to copy your clamp model files into the CAM-Part folder before insertion into the
            CAM-Part assembly.
           In the Assemble menu of Autodesk Inventor, click Place.
The Place Component dialog box is displayed.

                                                                                                                                           153
                Choose the Clamp.ipt file. This file contains the model of the clamping device.
                Confirm the component insertion with the Open button. The model is added.

                Align the model as shown.
                In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Setup > Edit menu.

                The Machine setup window is displayed.
                Click the Open ToolKit icon.
                The ToolKit window is displayed.
                Double click the Associative Fixture icon to add it below Station_1.

154
                                                     4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

Click and set the Z value as 35.

Expand Associative Fixture and click Part Mounting.
Enure the Z value is set as 35.

Click to select the fixture.
Click on the Machine Preview icon in the Machine setup window to visualise the fixture mounted on the part.

                                                                                                                                           155
                Close the Machine Preview window.
                Click Save & Exit in the Machine setup window.
                The fixture is now defined.

                9. Define a Pocket operation
                Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the
                highlighted faces.
                Choose the Coordinate System Position #1 in the Geometry page of the
                Pocket Operation dialog box.

                Define the Geometry as shown.
                Define a new End mill tool of Ø10 and choose it for the operation.
                Choose the appropriate tool holder.

                Define the Pocket depth on the top face of the pad as shown.
                Set the Wall offset and the Floor offset values to 0.2 to leave
                allowance for the next finishing operation.
                Use the Helical Ramping strategy. Set the Radius value to 5.

                10. Define a Pocket operation
                Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the highlighted
                faces.
                The Coordinate System Position #1 has to be chosen in the Geometry page
                of the Pocket Operation dialog box.

                Define the Geometry as shown.
                Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.
                Define the Upper level for the operation on the top face of the pad
                (used in the previous operation for the Pocket depth definition).

156
                                                      4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

Define the Pocket depth on the bottom face as shown.

Set the Wall offset and the Floor offset values to 0.2 to leave allowance for the further finishing.
Use the Helical Ramping strategy. Set the Radius value to 5.

11. Define a Pocket operation
Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough machining of the highlighted
faces.
Choose the Coordinate System Position #1 in the Geometry page of the
Pocket Operation dialog box.

Define the Geometry as shown.
Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.
Define the Upper level for the operation using the bottom face of
the previously machined pocket. Pick the Pocket depth as shown.

Set the Delta value for the Pocket Depth to -1 to perform the through pocket machining.
Set the Wall offset value to 0.2 to leave allowance for the further finishing.
Use the Helical Ramping strategy. Set the Radius value to 5.

                                                                                                                                           157
                12. Define a Profile operation
                Define a Profile operation to perform the finish machining of the highlighted
                faces.
                Choose the Coordinate System Position #1 in the Geometry page of the
                Profile Operation dialog box.
                Use the geometry defined in Step #9.
                Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.
                Use the same milling levels that were defined in Step #9.
                Choose the Arc strategy for Lead in and select the Same as Lead in check box under Lead out.

                13. Define a Profile operation
                Define a Profile operation to perform the finish machining of the highlighted
                faces.
                Choose the Coordinate System Position #1 in the Geometry page of the
                Profile Operation dialog box.
                Use the geometry defined in Step #10
                Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.
                Use the same milling levels used in Step #10. Set the Clear offset and the Step over parameters to perform the
                machining of the bottom face in several concentric profiles.
                Choose the Arc strategy for Lead in and select the Same as lead in check box under Lead out.

                14. Define a Profile operation
                Define a Profile operation to perform the finish machining of the highlighted
                faces.
                Choose the Coordinate System Position #1 in the Geometry page of the
                Profile Operation dialog box.
                Use the geometry defined in Step #11.
                Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.
                Use the same milling levels used in Step #11.
                Choose the Arc strategy for Lead in and select the Same as lead in check box under Lead out.

                15. Define a Pocket operation
                In the same manner as explained in Step #9, define a Pocket operation to
                perform the rough machining of the highlighted faces.
                Use the Coordinate System Position #3 for the operation.

158
                                                                              4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

16. Define a Pocket operation

In the same manner as explained in Step #10, define a Pocket operation to
perform the rough machining of the highlighted faces.

Use the Coordinate System Position #3 for the operation.

17. Define a Profile operation

In the same manner as explained in Step #12, define a Profile operation to
perform the finish machining of the highlighted faces.
Use the geometry defined in Step #15.
Use the Coordinate System Position #3 for the operation.

18. Define a Profile operation

In the same manner as explained in Step #13, define a Profile operation to
perform the finish machining of the highlighted faces. Use the Coordinate
System Position #3 for the operation.

Use the geometry defined in Step #16.

Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.

Set the Clear offset and the Step over values to perform the machining of the bottom face in several concentric
profiles.

19. Define a Pocket operation

Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough and finish machining of two
connector openings.

Use the Coordinate System Position #4 for the operation. Define the geometry
as shown.

Define a new End mill tool of Ø6 for the operation. Choose the appropriate tool holder.
                                                                                                                                           159
     20. Define a Pocket operation

     Define a Pocket operation to perform the rough and finish machining of the
     highlighted pocket faces.
     Use the Coordinate System Position #2 for the operation. Define the geometry
     .for the operation as shown

     Choose the Tool #1 (Ø10 End mill) for the operation.

     In the Finish section of the Technology page, select the Wall and the Floor check boxes to perform finishing of
     the walls and the floor of the pocket.

                 Pocket wall finishing

                        Wall finishing can be performed in a single cut at the whole depth or in a number of cuts at
                        each step down.

                            Total depth

                         When this option is chosen, the wall finishing is performed in a
                         single cut at the whole depth.

                            Each step down

                         When this option is chosen, the wall finishing is performed in
                         several successive cuts at each step down.

                                                                                        Cutting   Profile depth
                                                                                        Diameter  (Chamfer depth)

                                       The options of the Depth section are available
                                       only when the wall finishing is performed in
                                       the operation (the Wall check box is selected).

     Under Depth, choose the Each step down option.

160
                                                                                4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

21. Perform the holes machining

Define several Drilling operations to perform center drilling, drilling and
threading of the holes.

Using the Coordinate System Position #1, perform the machining of the M3
holes.

Use a Ø6 spot drill (with 90° tool tip angle), a Ø2.5 drill and a Ø3 tap tool.
Choose the appropriate tool holders.

Using the Coordinate System Position #2, perform the machining of the M6
holes.

Use the Ø6 spot drill (with 90° tool tip angle); a Ø5 drill and a Ø6 tap tool.
Choose the appropriate tool holders.

22. Perform the chamfer machining

At this stage, you have to define a Profile operation for the 0.5 mm
chamfer machining.

Choose the geometry defined in Step #9 for the operation. This
geometry is defined using the Coordinate System Position #1.

Define a Chamfer mill tool of Ø6 for the operation.

            Chamfer mill

                   This tool is used for chamfering. A tool of this type is defined with the parameters shown in
                   the image.

                                                            Arbor Diameter

 Total                           Shoulder
Length Outside         Cutting Length
                       Length
           Holder
           Length

                Angle

                                               Diameter

For the chamfer machining, set the value of the chamfer depth in the Profile depth field. In this case, set the
value of 0.5.

In the Rest material/Chamfer section, choose the Chamfer option from the list. A new page under the Chamfer
tab is displayed.

Define the Cutting diameter, which is the diameter of the tool coincident with the geometry at the chamfer
depth.

                                                                                161
                Set the Cutting diameter value to 2.
                In the Link section of the Profile Operation dialog box, choose the Arc strategy for
                Lead in and select the Same as Lead in check box under Lead out.
                In the same manner, define a new Profile operation to machine another chamfer of
                0.5 mm using Coordinate System Position #3.
                23. Simulate the tool path
                Simulate the CAM-Part in the SolidVerify mode.
                InventorCAM displays the fixture and checks the possible
                gouges during the simulation.
                In the SolidVerify simulation, the tool is shown going
                around the part (rather than rotating the part as it actually
                occurs in the CNC-machine). Therefore, for all CNC-
                machine types, the simulation looks the same.

 At this stage, you have completed the exercise.

162
                                                                       4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

Exercise #13: Mounting Machining

Define the CAM-Part and operations for machining of the mounting part shown below on the 4-axis vertical milling CNC-
machine.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
        · CAM-Part definition
        · Face milling
        · Pocket machining
        · Drilling

The Autodesk Inventor model of the Mounting part (Exercise13.ipt) is located in the Exercises
folder.
The mounting is machined from the stock pre-machined by turning.
The following steps have to be implemented in order to obtain the final CAM-Part:

              1. Define the CAM-Part
              At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (gMill_Haas_4x_
              eval), Machine Coordinate System, the Stock and Target models.

                           Machine Coordinate System definition
                                  In this exercise, the Machine Coordinate System has to be defined in
                                  the center of the revolution face as shown.

Using the Flip options in the CoordSys dialog box, rotate the                                              Z
Coordinate System so that the X-axis is collinear with the revolution
axis and the Z-axis is directed upwards as shown.                                                                     Y
                                                                                                        X

                                                                                                                         163
                                    Define an additional Machine Coordinate System #2 to machine the back faces of the mounting
                                    part.

                Define the Stock and the Target models using the configurations of the original Autodesk Inventor model.
                2. Face milling
                Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy to machine the shown face.
                Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #1) for the machining.

                3. Holes machining
                Define three Drilling operations to perform center drilling, drilling and threading of
                the M6 holes.

                4. Define the operation pattern
                Now you have to define a circular pattern of the operations around the revolution axis (4th axis) of the CAM-
                Part in order to machine all the sides.
                In InventorCAM Manager, select all the defined operations holding the Shift or Ctrl keys. Right-click one of the
                selected operations and choose the Transform option from the menu.

                The Operation Transformations dialog box is displayed.

164
                                                                                                             4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling
This dialog box enables you to perform various transformations, such as rotating, translating, and mirroring of
the selected operations.

            Operation transformations
                   This section offers you the choice of whether the original operation will be transformed or its
                   copy will be added for transformation and, in the latter case, enables you to define the placing
                   of the new operation in the InventorCAM Manager tree.
                   The following options are available:

                       Edit operation transformations

                    This option enables you to perform transformation of the selected operation.

                       New operation (add at current position in operations tree)

                    This option enables you to add a copy of the selected operation and apply the transformation
                    to the copied operation, without effect on the original operation. The transformed copy is
                    inserted immediately after the original operation in the InventorCAM Manager tree. The original
                    operation can be suppressed by selecting the appropriate check box in the Options section.

                       New operation (add at end of operations tree)

                    This option also enables you to add a copy of the selected operation and apply the transformation
                    to the copied operation, without effect on the original operation. The transformed copy is
                    inserted at the end of the operation list in the InventorCAM Manager tree. The original operation
                    can be suppressed by selecting the appropriate check box in the Options section.
In the Operation transformations section, use the default Edit operation transformations option.
In this exercise, you need to define a circular pattern of the selected operations around the 4th
axis. Click the 4 Axis button.
The Rotate List dialog box is displayed.
Select the Include original operation check box. When this check box is selected, the original
operation tool path is included in the transforming action.

                                                                                                                                           165
     In the Angle field, type in the value of 120°. This parameter defines the rotation angle for each pattern instance.
     In the Steps field, enter 2 for the number of instances.

     Click the Insert button. The specific value of the rotation angle is calculated for each instance of the pattern.
     Confirm the Rotate List dialog box with the OK button.
     The operations to be transformed appear in the Operation Transformations dialog box.

     Confirm this dialog box with the OK button.                            icon. This icon means that the

     Note that the icons of the transformed operations are marked with the
     operations were patterned using the 4th axis.

     5. Simulate the transformed operations

     Play the simulation of the transformed operations in the SolidVerify
     mode.

166
                                                                           4. Indexial 4-Axis Milling

6. Remove the clamping tail

Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy using the Machine
Coordinate System #2 to remove the tail that was necessary for the part
clamping at the 4th axis operations.

7. Machine the back side

Machine the pocket faces on the back side of the mounting.
Define several Pocket operations to perform rough and finish machining
of the pockets.
Use the Machine Coordinate System #2 for the operations.

                                                                           167
168
5 Indexial 5-Axis Milling
InventorCAM enables you to perform indexial 5-axis milling using either vertical or horizontal 5-axis CNC-machines.
The 4th and 5th axis rotation is used for positioning of a part. When the part is positioned
to the necessary orientation, the 4th and the 5th axes are locked and machining is
performed with 3-axis movements.
For each clamping, InventorCAM enables you to define the Machine Coordinate System.

Machine
Coordinate
System

InventorCAM enables you to perform indexial 5-axis milling using either vertical or horizontal 5-axis CNC-machines.

                                          Machine Coordinate System

                     Z     Y

                        X

     ZY                 Positions
          X

             Z                     Z
                Y                       Y
                  X
                                        X

170
                                                                                                                              5. Indexial 5-Axis Milling
The 4th and 5th axis rotation is used for positioning of a part. When the part is positioned to the necessary orientation, the
4th and the 5th axes are locked and machining is performed with 3-axis movements.
For each clamping, InventorCAM enables you to define the Machine Coordinate System.
For each clamping (Machine Coordinate System), InventorCAM enables you to define a number of related positions around
the Machine CoordSys. Take care of the machine limitations (angles or undercuts).

                       Shift X
Machine
Coordinate Z Y
System

                        X

   Shift Z

                              X'
                                          Position

                           Y' Z'

Shift Y

         Machine     ZY  X'
         Coordinate
         System          Y'              Position
                                    Z'

                     X

                         Rotation:
                         X= 0
                         Y= -90
                         Z= 180

For each position, InventorCAM automatically determines the Shift and Rotation parameters relative to the Machine
Coordinate System.

Machine Coordinate Systems and their positions are used for the geometry definition. Before the geometry definition you
have to choose the Coordinate System position. The geometry has to be located in the plane parallel to the XY-plane of the
chosen CoordSys.

                                    171
 Exercise #14: Clamp Machining

 Define the CAM-Part and operations for the machining of the clamp shown below on the 5-axis vertical milling CNC-
 machine.

 This exercise reinforces the following skills:
         · CAM-Part definition
         · Face milling
         · Pocket machining
         · Profile machining
         · Drilling
         · Indexial 5-axis machining

 The Autodesk Inventor model of the Clamp (Exercise14.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder. The model contains two
 Autodesk Inventor iPart members:

         · Machining
                This configuration represents the model after the machining.

         · Stock
                This configuration represents the pre-machined workpiece before machining. The
                dovetail is pre-machined to perform simple clamping of the part during the
                machining.
                1. Define the CAM-Part
                At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (TTC_Hermle_C20_full), Machine Coordinate
                System and its Positions, the Stock and Target models.

172
                                                                                                5. Indexial 5-Axis Milling
Coordinate System definition

       Define Machine Coordinate Systems #1 and #2 and related positions using the previously
       defined Stock model.

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #1
                    Position #1

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #1
                    Position #2

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #1
                    Position #3

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #1
                    Position #4

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #1
                    Position #5

              Machine Coordinate
                     System #2
                    Position #1

                                                                                                                              173
                Define the Stock model using the Stock configuration of the CAM-Part assembly.
                Define the Target model using the Machining configuration of the CAM-Part assembly.
                2. Top face machining
                Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy to machine the top
                inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #2)
                for the operation.

                3. Back face machining
                Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy to machine the back
                inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #3)
                for the operation.

                4. Front face machining
                Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy to machine the front
                inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #4)
                for the operation.

                5. Openings machining
                Define a Profile operation to machine two openings located on the front inclined
                face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #4) for the
                operation.

                6. Slot machining
                Define a number of operations to machine the slot faces located on the top
                inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #1 (Position #2)
                for the operation.

174
                                                                                5. Indexial 5-Axis Milling

7. Hole machining

Define a number of operations to machine the inclined counterbore hole
located on the top inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate
System #1 (Position #5) for the operation.

8. Bottom face machining

Define a Face Milling operation with the Hatch strategy to machine the bottom
inclined face of the clamp. Use the Machine Coordinate System #2 (Position #1)
for the operation.

                                                                                175
176
Toolbox  6
ToolBox sub-operations are a set of 2.5D Milling operations, each intended for a specific machining case. Some operations
cover different strategies of slots machining. Each sub-operation provides you with a specific machining strategy optimal for
a particular machining case.
These operations are combined in a single dialog box as sub-operations.
InventorCAM offers you the following types of ToolBox Cycles:

                                                        ToolBox Cycles

     Spiral Open Slot         Temporary Bridges    Flattened Surface
                                                        on Cylinder
     Spiral Open Slot Wide    Simple Corner
                                                           Rib Cut
     Spiral Closed Slot Wide  Broaching
                                                   Flattened Surface
     Additional ZigZag Slot Roll into Closed Slot        on Corner

                                                       Simple Boss

     Simple Slot              Simple Multi Bosses  Spiral Pocket

     Roll into Open Slot      One Side Open Slot   Wood Cutting

     Closed Slot              Ruled Surface        Angled Cylinder

     Spine Slot               O-Ring               Thin Wall Machining

178
                                                                                                     6. Toolbox

Spiral Open Slot
This strategy enables you to perform machining of open slots. The geometry consists of two
chains. The machining is performed in a spiral manner.

Spiral Open Slot Wide
This strategy enables you to perform machining of wide open slots. The first cutting pass is
performed in the spiral manner along the determined spine of the slot, and then the machining
of the slot walls is performed by a number of profiles equidistant to the slot geometry.

Spiral Closed Slot Wide
This strategy enables you to perform the machining of wide closed slots. The first cutting pass is
performed in the spiral manner along the determined spine of the slot, and then the machining
of the slot walls is performed along the slot geometry.

Additional Zigzag Slot
This strategy enables you to machine long slots. The tool path starts from the slot center
approaching it in a zigzag movement and goes toward the walls.

Simple Slot
This strategy enables you to perform one-pass machining of the slots with the width equal to
or smaller than double diameter of the tool.

Roll into open slot
This strategy enables you to machine an open slot starting from the slot center to the walls, while
rolling in the material with an arc movement.

Closed Slot
This strategy enables you perform machining of a closed slot with the width equal to the tool
diameter. The machining is performed in the zigzag manner; the last cut is horizontal to clean
the slot floor.

                                                                                                     179
 Spine Slot
 This strategy enables you to perform machining of a slot opened from one side. InventorCAM
 automatically determines the spine of the slot and performs the machining according to the
 spine's shape. In this sub-operation, the tool approaches the material along the spine and then
 machines the walls of the slot.

 Temporary Bridges
 This strategy enables you to machine the profile of a pocket while preserving the rest of the
 material fixed to the wall using small thin bridges. Inner material will be hammered for shorter
 machining time.

 Simple Corner
 This strategy enables you to perform machining of an open corner area in a number of equidistant
 cutting passes..

 Broaching
 This strategy enables you to perform broaching of holes.

 Roll into closed slot
 This strategy enables you to machine a closed slot starting from the slot center to the walls, while
 rolling in the material with an arc movement.

 Simple Multi Bosses
 This strategy enables you to perform the machining of several bosses starting from one face.
 The machining is performed in a number of equidistant Clear Offset passes parallel to the
 selected bosses geometry. The cutting passes are generated for the whole geometry combined
 from the initial bosses.

 One Side Open Slot
 This strategy enables you to machine an one-sided slot using two chains: a main chain and a
 drive chain. A spiral tool path is generated during this sub-operation.

180
                                                                                                        6. Toolbox

Ruled
This strategy enables you to perform the machining of an analytical ruled surface defined by two
open contours. The cutting passes are evenly distributed between the defined contours.

O-Ring
This strategy enables you to machine O-Ring slots.

Flattened Surface on Cylinder
This strategy enables you to perform machining of the flattened surface on a cylinder.

Rib Cut

This strategy enables you to machine a rib upper surface in a single pass shifted from the center line
by a specified value. This is a safe method of cutting the upper face of a thin wall.

Flattened Surface on Corner
This strategy enables you to machine an angled plane using a defined working area in order to
prevent air cuts.

Simple Boss
This strategy enables you to perform machining of a boss located on a model face. The machining
is performed in a number of equidistant cutting passes parallel to the boss geometry. The passes
are cut with the outer contour of the initial face.

Spiral Pocket
This strategy enables you to perform machining of the closed pocket areas using spiral techniques.
With this strategy, the tool penetrates into the material in the automatically calculated point inside the
pocket with a helix. Then the tool performs the spiral cutting pass morphing from the penetration
point to the closed area walls.

                                                                                                                                                            181
 Wood Cutting
 This strategy uses a special tool called "saw" to cut off a block of wood in a single pass. The First
 Step down parameter defines the depth of cutting.
 Angled Cylinder
 In this cycle, the cylinder top is cut to create an angled surface. The cutting is performed by parallel
 cuts with a defined Step over.
 Thin Wall Machining
 This strategy enables you to machine thin walls while removing gradually the excess material from
 either side of the wall. The method can be chosen from two options: Alternating steps or Supporting
 steps.

182
                                                                               6. Toolbox

Exercise #15: Standard Cycles Machining

This exercise illustrates the usage of Standard Cycles to machine twenty four
sample blocks located on a plate. Each block represents a specific machining
case machined in a cycle with customized parameters.

The part file (Exercise15.prz) is located in the Exercises folder. This file
contains the pre-defined CAM-Part.

1. Open the CAM-Part
Open the Exercise15.prz file located in the Exercises folder.

2. Spiral open slot machining
In InventorCAM Manager, right-click the Operations header and select Add Milling Operation > ToolBox Cycles.

The ToolBox cycles operation dialog box is displayed.

Make sure the default Spiral open slot strategy is chosen in the top left corner under Technology.
Click to define a new geometry.

                                                                                                                                           183
                Choose a pair of chains as shown.
                Confirm the geometry by clicking .
                Add a new End mill of Ø10.
                Select the Milling levels directly on the model.
                In the Technology page, under Offsets, set Wall offset to 0.5. Under
                Extension, set % of tool diameter to 80. Under Finish, select the Wall finish
                option.
                Click the Save icon.
                3. Wide spiral open slot machining
                In the same manner as described in the previous step, define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Spiral open slot wide strategy.

                Define a new geometry, selecting a pair of chains on the wide slot edges.
                Use the same tool as in the previous operation.
                In the Technology page, under Offsets, set Wall offset to 1. Under Finish,
                select the Wall finish option.
                Click the Save icon.
                4. Wide spiral closed slot machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Spiral closed slot wide strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting the open chain as shown.
                Use the same tool as in the previous operation.
                Click the Save icon.

184
5. Additional Zigzag slot machining                                          6. Toolbox
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.                                                185
Under Technology, select the Additional Zigzag Slot strategy.
Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chain as shown.
Use the same tool as in the previous operation.
Click the Save icon.

6. Simple Slot machining
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Simple Slot strategy.
Define a new geometry, selecting a pair of chains on the slot edges.
Add a new End mill of Ø16.
Click the Save icon.

7. Open slot machined by rolling
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Roll into open slot strategy.
Define a new geometry selecting a pair of chains as shown.
Add a new End mill of Ø12.
In the Technology page, set the Step down to 10. This slot will be machined
in one pass. Set the Approach distance to 1.25. Under Extension, set % of
tool diameter to 60.
Click the Save icon.

8. Closed Slot machining
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation
Under Technology, select the Closed Slot strategy.
Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chain as shown.
Use the previously defined End mill of Ø12. Click the Save icon.

            In the Closed Slot cycle, the tool diameter should be equal to
            the slot width.
                9. Spine Slot machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Spine Slot strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting the open chain as shown.
                Define a new End mill tool of Ø8.
                In the Technology page, set the Step down to 10. This slot will be machined
                in one pass. Set the Tolerance to 1. Under Extension, set % of tool diameter
                to 10.

                10. Temporary Bridges machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Temporary Bridges strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chain as shown.
                Define a new End mill of Ø10 for this operation and edit the following
                parameters:

                       · Set the Shoulder length to 60
                       · Set the Cutting length to 60

                11. Simple corner machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Simple Corner strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting the open chain as shown.
                Use the previously defined Tool #1 of Ø10.

                12. Broaching
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Broaching strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting a linear chain as shown.

186
                                                                                6. Toolbox

With this operation, only a Broaching tool is available.

Broaching Tool

       The tool of this type can only be used within the Broaching sub-operation. It is not available
       for defining or choosing in any other operation.

                      Arbor
                    Diameter

 Total                        Cutting
Length                        Length Outside

          Shoulder                         Holder
            Length                         Length

Width               Depth

                                                                 Corner Radius

Add a new Broaching tool and set its Width and Depth to 6.
In the Technology page, set the Tool side to Left.

13. Closed slot machined by rolling
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Roll into closed slot strategy.
Define a new geometry, selecting the open chain as shown.

Use the previously defined Tool #1 of Ø10.
In the Technology page, set the Approach distance value to 1.25. Under Extension, set % of tool diameter to 60.
14. Simple Multi Bosses machining
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Simple Multi Bosses strategy.

                                                                                                                                           187
                Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chains as shown.
                Use the previously defined Tool #1 of Ø10.
                In the Technology page, set the Step down value to 10. Under Clear offset,
                set Offset to 30.

                15. One Side Open Slot machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the One Side Open Slot strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting a pair of open chains: the first one is
                considered main, and the second one is the drive chain.
                Use the same tool as in the previous operations.

                16. Ruled Surface machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Ruled strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting a pair of open chains on the slot edges.
                Use the same tool as in the previous operations.

                17. O-ring machining
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the O-Ring strategy.
                Define a new geometry, selecting a pair of closed chains as shown. The first
                chain is considered external and the second one ­ internal.
                Add a new End mill of Ø4.

                18. Surface flattening on cylinder
                Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
                Under Technology, select the Flattened surface on cylinder strategy.
                For this operation, define a new Coordinate System position with the origin located on the cylinder revolution
                axis.

188
                                                                              6. Toolbox

Define a new geometry, selecting the linear open chain as shown.
Use the previously defined Tool #1 of Ø10.
On the Technology page, in the Clear offset section, click the Offset button
and pick the farther edge on the solid model. Set the Step over value to 3.
Place the mouse cursor in the Cylinder diameter edit box and pick the
external cylinder surface. The edit box is updated and set to 30.

19. Rib cutting
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Rib cut strategy.
Define a new geometry, selecting the edge as shown.
Use the same tool as in the previous operation.
In the Technology page, use the default parameters. The tool is shifted from
the center line by 10% of its radius.

20. Surface flattening on corner
Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Flattened surface on corner strategy.
For this operation, define a new Coordinate System position with the origin
located on the flattened surface plane.
Define a new geometry, selecting a straight line chain.
In the Working area section, click the Define button to assign a triangle
working area to the selected line.

The Working area dialog box is displayed. Make sure the Start angle and End angle are 45°.

Use the same tool as in the previous operation.

Define the Upper level by clicking on the upper edge of the flattened
plane. Define the Depth by clicking on the lower edge of the flattened
plane.

On the Technology page, in the Clear offset section, click the Offset
button and pick the farther edge on the solid model. Set the Step over
value to 2.

                                                                                                                                           189
     21. Simple Boss Machining
     Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
     Under Technology, select the Simple Boss strategy.
     In the Coordinate System #1, define a new geometry using the Multi-chain
     option. A pair of closed chains is selected automatically, where the first
     chain is considered external and the second one is internal.
     Use the same tool as in the previous operation.

     22. Spiral pocket machining
     Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
     Under Technology, select the Spiral pocket strategy.
     Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chain as shown.
     Use the same tool as in the previous operation.

     23. Wood cutting
     Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
     Under Technology, select the Wood cutting strategy.
     Define a new geometry, selecting the open chain.
     Add a new Saw tool of Ø40. Set the Shank width to 20.

     Saw Tool

     This tool type can only be used with the Wood       Outside                             Shank Width
     cutting sub-operation. It is not available for      Holder                                          Diameter
     defining or choosing in any other operation.    Total
                                                     Length                                       Internal
     A tool of this type is defined with the                                                      Diameter
     parameters shown in the image.

                                                                                 Blade  Saw
                                                                                 Thickness Thickness

190
                                                                                                  6. Toolbox

24. Cylinder top cutting

Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation.
Under Technology, select the Angled cylinder strategy.
Define a new Coordinate System position with the origin located at the cylinder revolution axis.
Define a new geometry, selecting the closed chain as shown.
Use the previously defined Tool #1 of Ø10.
In the Levels page, click the Depth button and select the depth of the cut
directly on the solid model.
In the Technology page, set the Max step down to 4. Choose the Zigzag
direction of cuts. Under Extension, set % of tool diameter to 60.

25. Thin Wall Machining

Define a new ToolBox Cycles operation and select the Thin Wall Machining strategy.

Define a new geometry, selecting two edges as shown.

Use the same tool as in the previous operation.

In the Technology page, use the default Alternating steps strategy for
roughing passes. Set the Step down to 6. Click the Offset button to clear the
offset up to the block edge.

Pick the edge as shown.

              Edit manually the Offset value to 28.
              26. Simulate the operations
              Right-click the Operations header and choose Simulate to
              play simulation for all ToolBox operations.
Now you have successfully finished the exercise.

                                                                                                                                                            191
192
Automatic Feature  7
    Recognition
 This chapter covers the following types of 2.5D Milling operations performed using the Automatic Feature Recognition
 module (AFRM) functionality:
 Pocket Recognition Operation
 This operation enables you to recognize pocket features on a solid model and perform machining of these features.

 Chamfer Recognition Operation
 This operation enables you to recognize the chamfer features on the solid model and perform machining of these features.
 The geometry creation process is similar to that of Pocket Recognition operation. The chamfer mill tool works on all edges
 maintaining the user-defined safety offset from the corners.

 Drill Recognition Operation
 This operation performs powerful drill feature recognition and automatic Drill geometry creation. This operation enables you
 to handle separate sets of Milling levels for each drill position. The initial values of the Milling levels sets are automatically
 recognized from the model; they can be edited by the user. A Geometry for Pocket, Chamfer, and Drill Recognition operations
 is determined automatically by InventorCAM AFRM functionality.

194
                                                                                  7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Exercise #16: Pocket Recognition

This exercise illustrates the InventorCAM functionality of automatic pocket
recognition and machining.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
        · Automatic pocket recognition and machining

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Open the CAM-Part
Open the Exercise16.prz file located in the Exercises folder. This file contains the pre-defined CAM-Part.

2. Add a Pocket Recognition operation

Right-click the Operations header in InventorCAM Manager and choose Pocket Recognition from the Add
Milling Operation submenu or click Ctrl+Shift+P.

The Pocket Recognition Operation dialog box is displayed.

3. Define the Geometry

In the Geometry page, click .
The Select Faces dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to define the
parameters of the pocket feature recognition geometry.
First, you need to set the pocket recognition filters and then the mode of geometry
selection.
Make sure that the Through Pocket check box is selected.

                                                                                                            195
Through Pocket

       When this check box is selected with the Selection Mode set to Solid Body, the recognition of
       through pocket features is also performed.

                                       Through Pockets

Only the through pocket features where the upper loop is identical to   Upper loop
the lower loop are recognized. The through pocket features that cannot    Lower loop
be machined with the current CoordSys position cannot be selected.
In the Circular Pocket diameter filter section, make sure that the
Apply filter check box is selected.

Circular Pocket diameter filter

       When the Apply filter check box is selected with the Selection mode set to Solid Body, circular
       pocket features can be selected according to their diameter. All circular pocket features with
       the diameter greater than the specified Min. Diameter value will be selected. Using this option,
       you can avoid machining of drill features that are supposed to be machined in other operations
       (Drilling, Drill recognition, etc.).

       The Min. Diameter parameter defines the minimum diameter of the pocket features. You can
       enter the value in the edit box or pick a cylindrical surface or a circular edge on the solid model
       when the cursor is placed in the Min. Diameter edit box.

       The Min. Face area parameter enables you to set a value to avoid picking up very small areas or
       faces that cannot be machined.

       When the Circular Pocket check box is not selected, all recognized circular pocket areas suitable
       for the current Coordinate System are selected.

                Generally, all the through holes of this part are recognized as circular pockets. In
                this operation, not all of these holes will be machined, only four column holes
                located in the corners of the top face.

                Place the cursor in the Min. Diameter edit box and then pick the edge of the column
                hole on the solid model. The circular edge diameter of 42 mm is displayed in the
                edit box. Edit the diameter by setting the value to 40. All of the holes with the
                diameter smaller than the specified value will not be machined.

                Define the mode of geometry selection.

                            Selection Mode

                                    This section enables you to set the mode of the geometry selection. The following selection
                                    modes are available:

196
                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition
                       Solid Body
                    This mode enables you to perform automatic recognition of pocket features on the picked
                    solid body. All planar faces are recognized with the surface normal vector oriented parallel to
                    the Z-axis of the current CoordSys.
                    The planar faces that cannot be machined with the current CoordSys position (undercuts)
                    cannot be selected (the selection is rejected). All the through pocket areas are recognized
                    .according to the Through pocket option

                                                                   Z

                                                                                            Selected faces

                               Undercut face
                               (selection rejected)

                       Face

                    This mode enables you to pick single planar faces. When a face is picked, InventorCAM checks
                    the parallel relation between the surface normal vector of the picked face and the positive
                    direction of the Z-axis of the current CoordSys. If they are not parallel, the face is not selected.
                    The undercut faces that cannot be machined with the current CoordSys position are also not
                    selected. The selection is working in the toggling mode: the first click on a face selects it, the
                    next click on the selected face removes the selection.

                       Through Pocket Chain

                    This mode enables you to select the through pockets by picking one of the edges of the lower
                    loop of the pocket area. When the edge is picked, the complete geometry of the through
                    pocket is automatically selected. The lower loop is highlighted on the model. The selection is
                    working in the toggling mode: the first click on an edge selects the loop, the next click on an
                    edge of the already selected loop removes the selection.
Under Selection mode, use the default Solid Body option.
Click on the solid model. InventorCAM generates the list of elements that suit your filter settings.
Click the Solid1 element in the list. All the recognized model features that take part in this
geometry are highlighted. The geometry includes all the planar faces, through pockets of
slots, and circular through pockets of column holes. Each model element is accompanied
by its Z-level value enclosed in parentheses.

                                                                                                                                           197
                Confirm the Select Faces dialog box by clicking .

                4. Define the Tool
                Add an End mill of Ø16 for the operation. Define the tool parameters as follows:

                   Set the Total length to 130
                   Set the Outside holder length to 120
                   Set the Shoulder length to 110
                   Set the Cutting length to 100
                Choose the tool for the operation.

                5. Define the machining levels
                Define the Upper level by clicking on the upper model face as shown.

                The cutting depth is calculated automatically for each recognized feature according to the solid model.
                Select the Equal step down option and set the Max step down value to 5.

                6. Define the technological parameters
                Switch to the Technology page. All the parameters in this page are identical to those used in the Pocket operation.
                Use the default parameters of pocket machining.
                Since the recognized geometry contains open pocket areas, the Open pocket tab
                is made available. Switch to the Open pocket page and select the Approach from
                outside check box. With this option, the approach to the open pocket areas is
                performed from the outside of the material.

                7. Define the Ramping strategy
                In the Link page, choose the Helical ramping strategy and set the Radius to 5. The chosen ramping strategy
                affects the close pocket areas where the horizontal approach from outside (defined in the previous step) is
                impossible.

198
                                                  7. Automatic Feature Recognition

8. Calculate the tool path
Click .

9. Simulate the operation
Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

Now you have successfully finished the exercise.

                                                  199
 Exercise #17: Mounting Box Machining

 In this exercise, the InventorCAM functionality of automatic pocket recognition
 and machining is used for rough milling of the mounting box inner surfaces.
 This exercise reinforces the following skills:

         · CAM-Part definition
         · Profile machining
         · Automatic pocket recognition and machining
         · Rest material machining
 The Autodesk Inventor model of the mounting box part (Exercise17.ipt) is located in the Exercises folder.
 The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

                1. Define the CAM-Part
                At this stage, you have to define the CAM-Part, CNC-controller (AWEA1000-Fanuc), Machine Coordinate
                System, the Stock and Target models.

                2. External contour machining
                Define a Profile operation to perform rough machining of the
                external contour of the part. Use an End mill tool of Ø20.

                3. Pocket roughing
                Define a Pocket Recognition operation to remove the bulk of
                material and perform the rough machining of the part inner surfaces.
                Use the End mill tool of Ø20 used in the previous operation.

                4. Pocket rest material machining
                Define a Pocket Recognition operation to perform the rest material
                machining of the part inner surfaces. Use an End mill tool of Ø10.

200
                                                                             7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Exercise #18: Drill Recognition

This exercise illustrates the InventorCAM functionality of automatic drill
recognition and machining.

              This exercise reinforces the following skills:
        · Automatic drill recognition and machining

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-
Part:

1. Open the CAM-Part

Open the Exercise18.prz file located in the Exercises folder. This file contains the CAM-Part machined in the
Pocket Recognition exercise.

2. Add a Drill Recognition operation
Add a new Drill Recognition operation to perform center drilling of holes.
The Drill Recognition Operation dialog box is displayed.

3. Define the Geometry

In the Geometry page, click .
InventorCAM parses the solid model and recognizes all of its hole features. The
.model becomes transparent so that all of its hole features are visible

The HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables
you to specify the holes to be included in the operation geometry.

In this operation, you will perform the center drilling of all the holes that can be
machined using the defined CoordSys position, except for the column holes that
were machined in the previous operation as through pocket features.

In the Hole Type section, make sure that both the Through and Blind check boxes
are selected. In this operation, both through and blind holes will be drilled.

The HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box enables you to filter the hole features
to be machined by diameter, upper level and height.

Select the Hole Diameter check box.

                                                                                                                                           201
                            Hole Diameter (d)
                                    When this section is activated, the hole features are filtered according to the diameter of the
                                    hole. With this filter, only the hole features with the Hole Diameter value within the specified
                                    range are recognized.
                                    The From and To values enable you to define the Diameter range by entering the values or by
                                    picking on the solid model.
                                    When the cursor is placed in the From/To edit box, you can specify the diameter value by picking
                                    a specific cylindrical surface or a circular edge on the solid model.
                                    When a cylindrical surface or a circular edge is picked, its diameter is calculated and inserted
                                    into the corresponding edit box replacing the previous value.
                                    The edit box changes the background color to indicate the associativity field (by default, pink).
                                    When you remove the automatically determined value, the edit box background turns white
                                    again.

                Define the upper limit for the diameter range. Place the cursor in the To edit box
                and pick the edge of the column hole as shown. The diameter of the hole (42 mm)

                is displayed in the edit box.
                Edit the diameter by setting the value to 40.
                In this operation, the holes will be machined irrespective of their upper levels. Make sure that the Hole Upper
                level check box is not selected.

                            Hole Upper level (u)
                                    When this section is activated, the hole features are filtered according to the Upper level.
                                    With this filter, only the hole features with the Upper level value within the specified range are
                                    recognized.
                                    The From and To values enable you to define the Upper level range by entering the values or by
                                    picking on the solid model. When the cursor is placed in the From/To edit box, you can specify
                                    the Upper level value by picking on the solid model. When a model point is picked, the Z-value
                                    of the picked position is calculated and inserted into the corresponding edit box replacing the
                                    previous value.
                                    The edit box changes the background color to indicate the associativity field (by default, pink).
                                    When you remove the automatically determined value, the edit box background turns white
                                    again.

                In this operation, the holes of all heights will be machined. Make sure that the Hole height check box is not
                selected.

202
                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition
            Hole Height (h)

                   When this section is activated, the hole features are filtered according to the Hole height.
                   With this filter, only the hole features with the Hole height value within the specified range are
                   recognized.
                   The From and To values enable you to define the Hole height range by entering the values or by
                   picking on the solid model. When the cursor is placed in the From/To edit box, you can specify
                   the Hole height value by picking on the solid model. When a model point is picked, the Z-value
                   of the picked position is calculated and inserted into the corresponding edit box replacing the
                   previous value. The edit box changes the background color to indicate the associativity field (by
                   default, pink). When you remove the automatically determined value, the edit box background
                   turns white again.
Click the Find Holes button. The hole features that match the specified filter
criteria are determined. These features are listed in the Holes Tree section.
Click the Preview button. The hole features are highlighted on the model.

            Holes Tree
                   In this list, the recognized hole features are classified by Shapes and Groups. A Shape contains
                   all the hole features with the same topology; within a Shape, the Groups include all the hole
                   features with the same parameter values (Upper Level, Height and Diameter). For each Group,
                   the Upper level (u) and Height (h) are displayed in parentheses. When you select a Shape or a
                   Group item in the list, the hole features that belong to this Shape or Group are highlighted on
                   the model.

Confirm the HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box by clicking .

                                                                                                                                           203
                4. Define the Tool
                Add a new Spot drill tool of Ø16. Define the tool parameters as follows:

                   Set the Total length to 70
                   Set the Outside holder length to 60
                   Set the Shoulder length to 50
                Choose the tool for the operation.

                5. Define the Levels
                Click the Depth edit button in the Levels page.
                The Depth Edit dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to edit the Milling Levels parameters (Upper
                Level, Drill Depth, Delta Depth) for each drill separately.
                Notice the list of drill instances displayed in the Holes Tree section.

                            Holes Tree
                                    This section displays the list of all drill instances chosen for the geometry. All the
                                    drill instances in the list are structured into Groups with the same Upper Level, Drill
                                    Depth, Delta Depth and Depth Type. For each Group in the list, the drill instances
                                    data are displayed in parentheses. Each drill instance in the list is accompanied by the
                                    X- and Y-coordinates of the drilling position. Selecting the check boxes next to each element in
                                    the list enables you to include the hole features, Shapes or Groups into the geometry.
                                                  Do not confuse the Group classification in this dialog box with that taking place at
                                                  the stage of geometry definition.

                By default, the Depth Edit dialog box displays the parameter values recognized from the solid model. Now you
                need to define the Upper Level, Drill/Chamfer Depth and Depth Type parameters for each group of drill instances
                separately.
                Select the Group1 item in the Holes Tree section. The drill instances that belong to this group are highlighted on
                the model.

                First, define the upper level for drilling.

204
                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition

            Upper Level (u)

                   This value can be applied to a single hole, a group or all holes.

                   The edit box displays the Upper Level value of the selected item (a group or a hole). You can
                   enter the value or pick it directly from the model (when the cursor is placed in the edit box).
                   InventorCAM enables you to pick planar faces parallel to the XY-plane of the Coordinate
                   System, model vertices and sketch points. When a model is picked, the Z-value of the picked
                   position is displayed in the edit box. The edit box has pink background, which means that the
                   parameter is defined associatively to the solid model. When the edit box value is typed in, it is
                   not associative to the model; in this case the edit box has white background.

                   The Apply button enables you to apply the defined Upper Level value to the selected list item (a
                   group or a hole). When a new Upper Level value is applied, InventorCAM checks the Holes Tree
                   items and reorganizes them into groups according to the changed parameters. InventorCAM
                   checks all the groups to find a group with identical Upper Level, Drill Depth, Delta Depth and
                   Depth Type parameters. If such group is found, the program adds the updated drill to this
                   group. In case of absence of a suitable group, a new group is created; the updated drill instance
                   is added to this group.

Leave the Upper Level value unchanged (-24).

Define the Depth Type.

            Depth Type

                   This parameter can be defined for a single hole, a group or all
                   holes. You can define the diameter on the conical part of the
                   drilling tool that will reach the specified drilling depth during the
                   machining. You can also deepen a drilled hole in order to obtain a
                   given diameter at the specified drill depth.

                   The following options are available:

                       Cutter Tip

                    The drill tip reaches the defined drilling depth.

                       Full Diameter

                    The drill reaches the defined drilling depth with the full diameter.

                       Auto Chamfer/Spot drill

                    When this option is selected, the Drill depth section changes to Chamfer depth. The drill tip
                    reaches the drilling depth, which is calculated automatically, according to the value set in the
                    Chamfer depth section. To apply the Spot drill that only touches the hole edges, set this value
                    to 0. To apply the Auto Chamfer, set a defined value in the Chamfer depth field.

                       Diameter Value

                   The drill reaches the defined drilling depth with the drill cone diameter specified by the
                   Diameter Value parameter.

                                                                                                                                           205
                                    The Apply button enables you to apply the defined Depth Type to the selected list item (a group
                                    or a hole). When a new Depth Type is applied, InventorCAM checks the Holes Tree items and
                                    reorganizes them into groups according to the changed parameters. The program checks all
                                    groups to find a group with identical Upper Level, Drill Depth, Delta Depth and Depth Type
                                    parameters. If such group is found, the program adds the updated drill to this group. In case
                                    of absence of a suitable group, a new group is created; the updated drill instance is added to
                                    this group.

                Choose the Auto Chamfer option for Depth Type. The Drill depth section name changes to Chamfer depth. This
                type should be applied to all hole features in the operation. Select the All checkbox and click the Apply button.

                            Notice that if you do not click the Apply button after editing values, the change does not take effect.
                            Define the depth of the chamfering.

                            Drill/Chamfer Depth (d)
                                    This value can be applied to a single hole, a group or all holes.
                                    The edit box displays the Drill/Chamfer depth value of the selected item (a group or a hole). The
                                    edit box enables you enter the value or pick the value directly from the model (when the cursor
                                    is placed in the edit box). You can pick drill faces or edges. The program determines the depth
                                    of the picked drill according to the defined Upper Level and displays the value in the edit box.
                                    The edit box has pink background, which means that the parameter is defined associatively to
                                    the solid model. When the edit box value is typed in, it is not associative to the model; in this
                                    case the edit box has white background.
                                    The Apply button enables you to apply the defined Drill Depth value to the selected list item (a
                                    group or a hole). When a new Drill Depth value is applied, InventorCAM checks the Holes Tree
                                    items and reorganizes them into groups according to the changed parameters. The program
                                    checks all groups to find a group with identical Upper Level, Drill Depth, Delta Depth and Depth
                                    Type parameters. If such group is found, the program adds the updated drill to this group. In
                                    case of absence of a suitable group, a new group is created; the updated drill instance is added
                                    to this group.

                Set the Chamfer depth value to 0.2, select the All check box and click the Apply
                button.

                Apply the changes and confirm the Depth Edit dialog box with .

                6. Define the sorting of drill positions
                Switch to the Technology page.
                Use the advanced sorting option to sort the drill positions of the geometry. Under Sorting, choose the Advanced
                option and click .

206
                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition

The Advanced Sorting dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to define the parameters of sorting
of drill positions for machining of linear and circular drill patterns.

Linear sorting of drill positions

       The Linear tab contains sorting methods appropriate for machining of linear drill patterns.

         Linear pattern

       According to linear sorting methods, the machining is performed either by rows of drill positions
       with the same Y-coordinate or by columns of drill positions with the same X-coordinate. The
       Tolerance parameter enables you to define the tolerance that is used to determine if a drill
       position belongs to the current row/column or to a different row/column.

       When the machining is performed by rows, InventorCAM determines the first drill position
       for each row (the start position of the first row is the start position of the whole pattern). For
       each next drill position, the program determines the Y-coordinate and compares it with the
       Y-coordinate of the first drill position of the current row. If the linear deviation is within the
       specified Tolerance limit, the program considers this position to belong to the current row. If
       the deviation exceeds the Tolerance value, the drill position is rejected from the current row;
       later this position will be checked again for belonging to next rows.

       In the similar manner, when the machining is performed by columns, the specified Tolerance
       value is used to determine whether a specific drill position belongs to the current column. In
       this case, the deviation of X-coordinates between the first drill position in the column and the
       current drill position is compared with the Tolerance value.

Choose the   option in the Linear tab of the Advanced Sorting dialog box, and set the Tolerance
value to 5.

             207
                                    When this option is chosen, InventorCAM determines the position with the minimal X- and
                                    Y-coordinates and accepts it as the start position of the drill
                                    sequence. From this position, the program continues the
                                    machining of the drills with the same Y-coordinate; the
                                    machining is performed in the direction of increasing
                                    X-coordinates.
                                    When the last position of the current
                                    Y-coordinate is machined, the program passes to
                                    the next Y-coordinate (in the increasing order)
                                    and continues the machining of the next row from the
                                    position with the maximal X-coordinate to the position with
                                    the minimal X-coordinate (decreasing order), and so on. In such manner, the machining of
                                    two successive rows is performed in the opposite order: each odd row is machined in the
                                    direction of increasing X-coordinates, each even row is machined in the direction of decreasing
                                    X-coordinates.
                                    The rows are machined in the direction of increasing Y-coordinates.
                In the Advanced Sorting dialog box, click the OK button to confirm the definition of sorting parameters.
                Click the Show Sorted button to preview the sorted drill positions on the solid model.

                Close the Show Geometry dialog box with .

                7. Calculate the tool path
                Click .

                8. Simulate the operation
                Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify mode.

208
                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition
9. Machine the Ø6.8 holes
Add a new Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling of the Ø6.8 holes.
In the HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box, activate the Hole Diameter section.
Place the cursor in the From edit box and pick the hole edge as shown.
The diameter value (6.8) is displayed in both From and To edit boxes defining the
range for the Hole Diameter filter.

Click the Find Holes button. The holes of the specified diameter are highlighted on the model.

Confirm the HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box by clicking .
Add a new Ø6.8 Drill tool.

Click the Depth Edit button in the Levels page. The Depth Edit dialog box is displayed. Note that the values of
the Upper Level (-24) and Drill Depth (26.29) parameters are offered you as defaults. These values are recognized
automatically on the model.

Confirm the Depth Edit dialog box dialog box by clicking .

In the Technology page, choose the Advanced sort option under Sorting and click the  button.

In the Linear tab of the Advanced Sorting dialog box, choose the  option.

                                                                                              209
                                    When this option is chosen, InventorCAM determines the position with the minimal X- and
                                    Y-coordinates and accepts it as the start position of the drill
                                    sequence. From this position, the program continues the
                                    machining of the drills with the same X-coordinate; the
                                    machining is performed in the direction of increasing
                                    Y-coordinates.
                                    When the last position of the current X-coordinate is
                                    machined, the program passes to the next X-coordinate (in
                                    the increasing order) and continues the machining of the next
                                    column from the position with the maximal Y-coordinate to
                                    the position with the minimal Y-coordinate (decreasing order), and so on. In such manner, the
                                    machining of two successive columns is performed in the opposite order: each odd column is
                                    machined in the direction of increasing Y-coordinates, each even column is machined in the
                                    direction of decreasing Y-coordinates.
                                    The columns are ordered in the direction of increasing X-coordinates.

                Click the Show Sorted button to preview the sorted drill positions on the solid model.

                Under Drill cycle, click the Drill cycle type button and choose the Peck type from the list. Click the Data button
                to define the pecking parameters.
                In the displayed Drill Options dialog box, set the Step down value to 2 and confirm
                the dialog box with the OK button.
                Save and calculate the operation.

                 10. Machine the Ø8 holes
                Add a new Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling of the Ø8 holes.
                In the HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box, activate
                the Hole Diameter section. Define the range for the Hole
                Diameter filter as explained in the previous step. The values
                of 8 mm are displayed in the Hole Diameter section.
                Add a new Drill tool. The diameter of the drilling tool must
                be smaller than the diameter of the holes, because these
                holes will be reamed at the next stage.

                            You can define the diameter of the tool by clicking
                            on the entity to be machined with this tool directly
                            on the solid model. Place the cursor in the Diameter edit box in the Topology page of the Part Tool
210
                                                                  7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Table and pick the edge of the hole as shown.

            The Diameter value (7.8) is displayed in the edit box.               button.
In the Technology page, choose the Advanced option under Sorting and click the

In the Linear tab of the Advanced Sorting dialog box, choose the  option, set the Tolerance value to 2
and click the Show sorted button.

Under Drill cycle, choose the Peck cycle type and set the Step down value to 2.

Save and calculate the operation.

11. Machine the Ø4.2 holes
Add a new Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling of the Ø4.2 holes.

In the HR Drill Geometry Selection dialog box, define the range for the Hole Diameter filter as explained in the
previous steps. The values of 4.2 mm will be displayed in the Hole Diameter section.
Add a new Ø4.2 Drill tool.

                                                                                                                                           211
     In the Technology page, choose the Advanced option under Sorting and click the button.

     In the Linear tab of the Advanced Sorting dialog box, choose the  option and click the Show Sorted
     button.

     Under Drill cycle, choose the Peck cycle type and set the Step down value to 2.
     Save and calculate the operation.

     12. Machine the Ø13.5 holes
     In the same manner as explained in the previous steps, perform drilling of the set of Ø13.5 holes.

     Use the Default drill sorting option.

     13. Machine the Ø6.5 holes
     In the same manner as explained in the previous steps, perform drilling of the set of Ø6.5 holes.

212
                                            7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Use the  option of Advanced drill sorting.

When this option is chosen, InventorCAM determines the position with the
minimal X- and Y-coordinates and accepts it as the start position of the drill
sequence. From this position, the program continues the machining of the
drills with the same Y-coordinate; the machining is performed in the direction
of increasing X-coordinates.

                   When the last position of the current Y-coordinate is machined, the program passes to the next
                   Y-coordinate (in the increasing order) and continues the machining of the next row from the
                   position with the minimal X-coordinate to the position with the maximal X-coordinate
                   (increasing order) and so on. In such manner, the machining of the rows is performed in the
                   same direction of increasing X-coordinates.

                   The ordering of rows is performed in the direction of increasing Y-coordinates.

Click the Show Sorted button to preview the sorted drill positions on the solid model.

14. Perform reaming of the Ø8 holes
Add a new Drill Recognition operation to perform reaming of the Ø8 holes.
Use the Drill_r2 geometry defined in Step # .
Add a new Ø8 Reamer tool.

                                                                                213
Reamer

       This tool is used to machine precise holes in Drilling operations. A tool of this type is defined
       with the parameters shown in the image. Selecting a reamer tool in a drilling operation,
       automatically displays the correct default cycle for reamers.

                                                Arbor
                                              Diameter

 Total  Outside
Length  Holder

        Length                                     Cutting
                                                   Length

Tip Diameter                                       Chamfer
     Diameter                                       Length

To define the depth, pick the model face as shown.

The Drill depth value (12) is displayed. Click the Apply button.

Define the sorting of drill positions as explained in Step # . Click .

15. Simulate the operations
Simulate the operations defined in Steps #9 ­ #13 in the SolidVerify mode.

 Now you have successfully finished the exercise.
214
                                                                                        7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Exercise #19: Electronic Box Machining

In this exercise, the InventorCAM functionality of automatic drill recognition and
machining is used for rough milling of the electronic box hole features.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:

        · Automatic drill recognition and machining

The electronic box part file (Exercise19.prz) is located in the Exercises folder. This
file contains the defined CAM-Part. The model used for the part definition contains
two configurations: Default (model with hole features) and Stock (hole features
suppressed).

Default                                 Stock

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-Part:

1. Center drilling

Define a Drill Recognition operation to perform center
drilling of all hole features. Use a Spot drill tool of Ø2.5.

2. Drilling

Define a Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling
of the Ø1.2 holes. Use a Drill tool of Ø1.2.

                                                                                        215
                3. Drilling
                Define a Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling
                of the Ø1.8 holes. Use a Drill tool of Ø1.8.
                4. Drilling
                Define a Drill Recognition operation to perform drilling
                of the Ø2.2 holes. Use a Drill tool of Ø2.2.

216
                                          7. Automatic Feature Recognition

Exercise #20: Edge Deburring Recognition

This exercise illustrates the InventorCAM functionality of automatic chamfer recognition and machining.

This exercise reinforces the following skills:
        · Automatic chamfer recognition and machining

The following steps have to be implemented in order to reach the final CAM-
Part:

1. Open the CAM-Part

Open the Exercise20.prz file located in the Exercises folder. This file contains the CAM-Part machined in the
Pocket Recognition and Drill Recognition exercises.

2. Add a Chamfer Recognition operation

Right-click the Operations header in InventorCAM Manager and choose Edge Deburring Recognition from the
Add Milling Operation submenu.

The Edge Deburring Recognition Operation dialog box is displayed.

3. Define the Geometry

In the Geometry page, click the  button.

The Select Faces dialog box is displayed. This dialog box enables you to define the
parameters of the chamfer feature recognition geometry.

First, you need to set the chamfer recognition filters and then the mode of geometry
selection.

In the Circular Pocket diameter filter section, make sure that the Apply filter check
box is selected.

Circular Pocket diameter filter

 When this check box is selected with the Selection mode set to Solid
 Body, circular pocket features can be selected according to their
 diameter. All circular pocket features with the diameter greater than
 the specified Min. Diameter value will be selected for chamfering.

 The Min. Diameter parameter defines the minimum diameter of
 the pocket features. You can enter the value in the edit box or pick
 a cylindrical surface or a circular edge on the solid model when the
 cursor is placed in the Min. Diameter edit box.

 When the Ignore edges followed by fillet check box is selected, chamfering will not be performed
 on any solid model edge featuring a fillet.

 When the Ignore floor-wall angle less than check box is selected, chamfering will not be performed
 in the already existing chamfers at the edges of floors and/or the edges of angled walls.

                                                                                                         217
                                    When the Apply filter check box is not selected, all recognized circular pocket areas suitable for
                                    the current Coordinate System are selected.

                Set the Min. Diameter value to 20. All of the holes with the diameter smaller than the specified value will not be
                chamfered.
                Define the mode of geometry selection. Under Selection mode, use the default Solid Body option.
                Click on the solid model. InventorCAM generates the list of elements that suit your filter settings.
                Click the Solid1 element in the list. All the recognized model features that take part
                in this geometry are highlighted. The geometry includes all the planar faces, through
                pockets of slots, and circular through pockets of column holes. Each model element
                is accompanied by its Z-level value enclosed in parentheses.
                Confirm the Select Faces dialog box by clicking .

                4. Define the Tool
                Add a Chamfer mill of Ø10 for the operation. Define the
                tool parameters as follows:

                   Set the Total length to 100
                   Set the Outside holder length to 60
                Choose the HSK A 63 ER 40x80 collect chuck.
                Select the tool for the operation.

                5. Define the machining levels
                Define the Chamfer depth by setting the value to 0.5.

                6. Define the technological parameters
                Switch to the Technology page. Set the Cutting diameter value to 2. The chamfer depth will be reached with the
                tool diameter of 2 mm.

218
                                                                                                                7. Automatic Feature Recognition
                           Safety offset

                                  For geometries that consist of open chains, Safety offset is the offset
                                  that prevents the tool gouging with the vertical wall.
                                  InventorCAM automatically calculates the optimal value of the Safety
                                  offset.
              Set the Safety offset value to 2.
              7. Define the Link in and Link out
              In the Link page, select the Normal option from Lead in list and set the Normal length to 3. Select the Same as
              Lead in check box in the Lead out section.
              8. Calculate the tool path
              Click .
              9. Simulate the operation
              Simulate the operation in the SolidVerify mode.
              Now you have successfully finished the exercise.

Congratulations!

You have successfully finished the 2.5D Milling part of the InventorCAM 2024 Milling Training Course.

                                                                                                                                                            219
                                                                          The Complete CAM Solution, with
                                                                          Revolutionary iMachining, best support
                                                                          for Multi-Channel Mill-Turn and Swiss
                                                                          CNCs, seamlessly Integrated in and
                                                                          associative to SOLIDWORKS®, Inventor®
                                                                          and Solid Edge®.
                                                                          iMachining 2D
                                                                          iMachining 3D
                                                                          2.5D Milling
                                                                          Indexial Multi-Sided
                                                                          HSS Machining
                                                                          3D High Speed Milling
                                                                          Simultaneous 5-Axis
                                                                          Turning
                                                                          Advanced Mill-Turn
                                                                          Swiss-Type
                                                                          Solid Probe

solidcam.com
