MASTERCAM WIRE
      TUTORIAL

           June 2018
                     MASTERCAM WIRE TUTORIAL

June 2018
© 2018 CNC Software, Inc. ­ All rights reserved.
Software: Mastercam 2019

                                            Terms of Use

Use of this document is subject to the Mastercam End User License Agreement. The Mastercam End User License
Agreement can be found at:
http://www.mastercam.com/companyinfo/legal/LicenseAgreement.aspx

                         Be sure you have the latest information!

Information might have changed or been added since this document was published. The latest version of the doc-
ument is installed with Mastercam or can be obtained from your local Reseller. A ReadMe file (ReadMe.PDF) ­
installed with each release ­ includes the latest information about Mastercam features and enhancements.

                                                                                                    ii
                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction                                               5

General Tutorial Requirements                              5

Single Contour Toolpaths                                   7

Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation         7

Exercise 2: Setting Up Single Contour Stock                9

Exercise 3: Selecting Single Contour Geometry              11

Exercise 4: Entering Wirepath Parameters                   12

Exercise 5: Backplotting the Single Contour Toolpath       14

Exercise 6: Changing Toolpath Parameters                   15

Exercise 7: Backplotting the Updated Toolpath              18

Exercise 8: Posting the Toolpath                           19

Multiple Contour Wirepaths                                 23

Exercise 1: Preparing the Multiple Contour Part            23

Exercise 2: Selecting Multiple Contour Geometry            24

Exercise 3: Entering Multiple Contour Toolpath Parameters  26

Exercise 4: Adjusting the Chains                           28

Exercise 5: Verifying the Toolpath                         30

No Core Toolpaths                                          33

Exercise 1: Preparing the No Core Part                     33

Exercise 2: Setting Up No Core Stock                       35

Exercise 3: Selecting No Core Geometry                     36

Exercise 4: Entering No Core Toolpath Parameters           37

Exercise 5: Backplotting the No Core Toolpath              38

4-axis Toolpaths                                           41

Exercise 1: Importing the 4-axis Machine                   41

Exercise 2: Preparing the 4-axis Part                      41

Exercise 3: Setting Up 4-axis Stock                        43

Exercise 4: Selecting 4-axis Geometry                      44

Exercise 5: Entering 4-axis Toolpath Parameters            45

                                                 iii
Exercise 6: Backplotting the 4-axis Toolpath      47

Conclusion                                        49

Mastercam Resources                               49

Contact Us                                        49

                                              iv
                                                                                                                                                      Mastercam Wire Tutorial--Introduction

                               INTRODUCTION

Mastercam Wire delivers comprehensive wire EDM software with powerful toolpaths and techniques. This tutorial
provides an introduction to Mastercam Wire workflow and best practices.

Goals

     l Practice creating and selecting part geometry for your toolpaths.
     l Enter appropriate toolpath parameters for different toolpath types.
     l Make changes to your toolpath and update the tool motion.
     l Verify your toolpath motion using several different tools.

      WARNING: Screen colors in the tutorial pictures were modified to enhance image quality; they may not
      match your Mastercam settings or the tutorial results. These color differences do not affect the lesson or
      your results.

Estimated time to complete this tutorial: 2.5 hours
General Tutorial Requirements

All Mastercam 2019 tutorials have the following general requirements:
     l You must be comfortable using the Windows® operating system.
     l The tutorials cannot be used with Mastercam Demo/Home Learning Edition. The Demo/HLE file format
         (emcam) is different from Mastercam (mcam), and basic Mastercam functions, such as file conversions and post-
         ing, are unavailable.
     l Each lesson in the tutorial builds on the mastery of the preceding lesson's skills. We recommend that you com-
         plete them in order.
     l Additional files may accompany a tutorial. Unless the tutorial provides specific instructions on where to place
         these files, store them in a folder that can be access from the Mastercam 2019 workstation, either with the
         tutorial or in any location that you prefer.
     l You will need an internet connection to view videos that are referenced in the tutorials. All videos can be
         found on our YouTube channel:
         www.youtube.com/user/MastercamTechDocs
     l All Mastercam tutorials require you to configure Mastercam to work in a default Metric or Inch configuration.
         The tutorial provides instructions for loading the appropriate configuration file.

                                                                                                    5
6
                                                 CHAPTER 1

                    SINGLE CONTOUR TOOLPATHS

A wire contour toolpath is best used with parts that have the same shape at the top and bottom. This lesson focuses
on the basic workflow used to create a wire contour toolpath.

Goals

     l Open a part file and assigning a machine definition.
     l Create a contour toolpath with a single contour.
     l Backplot to check the toolpath.
     l Post the toolpath.

Exercise 1: Getting Started with Toolpath Creation

In this exercise, you open a part and select a machine definition that simulates a wire EDM machine.
    1. Start Mastercam using your preferred method:
            a. Double-click Mastercam's desktop icon.

                 OR
            b. Launch Mastercam from the Windows Start menu.
    2. Select the default metric configuration file:
            a. Click the File tab.
            b. Choose Configuration from Mastercam's Backstage View to open the System Configuration dialog

                 box.

            c. Choose ...\mcamxm.config <Metric> from the Current drop-down list.

            d. Click OK.

                                                                                                    7
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       3. Choose File, Open and select the part file, single_contour.mcam provided with the tutorial.
            The gear shape is the single contour for this toolpath. Mastercam Wire also needs a thread point for the
            toolpath, which is the point where the machine threads the wire, often a pre-drilled hole in the material. By
            creating a thread point in Mastercam and selecting it as part of the toolpath, it becomes associative, which
            means the toolpath updates if the point moves.

       4. On the Wireframe tab, choose Point Position.
       5. In the Point Position function panel, choose Thread Point.

            The thread point symbol may be hard to see depending on your background color. Before you begin to
            identify the thread point, zoom into the area if you need to see it more clearly.

       6. Drag and drop the graphics window prompt and press [Spacebar] to access FastPoint mode and type in the
            point coordinates.

            Because the prompt window hides anything under it, you may not want to move it over information displayed
            in Toolpaths Manager, or any used sidebar areas.
       7. Type X-40, Y0.2, Z0 and press [Enter]. A point with the thread symbol displays to the left of the part.
       8. Click OK in the Point Position function panel to complete the function.
            You now have the geometry you need for a basic contour toolpath.

                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

    9. On the Machine tab, choose Wire, Default to select the default wire machine definition.
         The machine definition is a model of your machine tool's capabilities and features. It provides a template
         for setting up machining jobs.
         Choosing the machine definition adds a machine group and a toolpath group to the Toolpaths Manager.
         Toolpaths you create are placed at the red arrow in this list.

  10. Choose File, Save As and save the part under a different file name. This protects the original tutorial file
         from being overwritten.

Exercise 2: Setting Up Single Contour Stock

Defining a stock model helps you visualize your toolpaths more realistically. You can see your stock boundaries with
the part geometry when you backplot or verify toolpath operations.

    1. In the Toolpaths Manager, expand Properties under Machine Group, and click Stock setup.

    2. Enter the following values to set the stock boundaries:
              l Enter Y75, X75, and Z10 for the stock dimensions.
              l Enter a Z value of 10 for the stock origin.

                                                                                                    9
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       3. Select Display and Fit screen to show the stock boundaries and include the boundaries when you use the Fit
            to Screen function.

       4. Click OK to complete the stock setup.
       5. Right-click in the graphics window and choose Isometric (WCS) to get a clearer view of the stock boundaries.

                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

Exercise 3: Selecting Single Contour Geometry

Selecting geometry for toolpaths in Mastercam Wire is called chaining. Chaining is the process of selecting and link-
ing pieces of geometry to form the foundation of a toolpath, surface, or solid. When you chain geometry, you select
one or more sets of curves (lines, arcs, and splines) that have adjoining endpoints. You can also chain points, which is
important for setting thread and cut positions in your toolpath.
In Mastercam Wire, you can chain either wireframe or solid geometry for your toolpaths. This example involves
chaining wireframe geometry.

    1. On the Wirepaths tab, choose Contour.

    2. To associate the point with the toolpath, select the thread point you created as the first chain.
         Note: When the stock size is close to the part size, the thread point is often outside the stock.

    3. Select the gear shape as the second chain. Click on the area closest to the thread point. The green arrow
         showing chain direction should go in a counterclockwise direction.

    4. Click Options on the Chaining dialog box to access additional chaining parameters.

                                                                                                   11
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       5. Select Break closest entity to thread point.

            This option breaks the entity closest to the thread point into two pieces so you begin the toolpath with a per-
            pendicular move. This creates the shortest motion possible between the thread point and the chained geo-
            metry.
       6. Click OK on the Chaining Options dialog box.
       7. Click OK on the Chaining dialog box to continue to set the wirepath parameters in the Wirepath - Contour
            dialog box.

  Exercise 4: Entering Wirepath Parameters

   The next step is to set the values for each aspect of the toolpath. The Wirepath - Contour dialog box includes the
   options you need to program your part.

                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                           Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

1. Choose Wire/Power from the Tree View pane on the left side of the dialog box.

     A power library contains wire EDM machine-specific settings for the material you are cutting.
    A power library can contain up to 24 passes. A pass is a single path made by the wire around a contour. Each
     pass includes unique power settings needed to cut a certain material type on a certain wire EDM machine. For
     example, Pass 1 in the library may correspond to a rough cut, Pass 2 a tab cut, and Passes 3 - 5 finish cuts (also
    known as skim cuts).
2. Enter 0.2 for Wire Diameter.

     This toolpath will only have one pass, so you do not need to make other changes.
3. Choose Compensation from the Tree View pane.
4. Set Compensation Type to Computer.

     This option computes the compensated wirepath and does not output control codes for compensation. This
     allows you to see a more accurate representation of the toolpath motion.
5. Choose Taper from the Tree View pane.
     This page sets various toolpath heights, including the UV and XY heights that indicate the top and bottom of
     the stock.

                                                                                              13
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       6. Set the Rapid height, UV trim plane, and UV height to 15.0. The rapid height is the Z height of the upper
            wire guide for rapid moves. The UV trim plane sets the position of the upper wire guide.

       7. Click OK to complete the toolpath.
       8. Click OK to close the Chain Manager.

            The Chain Manager displays for access to the change at point or sorting options. These options are discussed
            in Lesson 2.
            The following picture shows the completed toolpath.

       9. Choose File, Save from the menu to save your progress.

  Exercise 5: Backplotting the Single Contour Toolpath

   Mastercam's Classic Backplot shows the path the wire takes to cut your part. This display lets you spot errors in the
   program before you machine the part.

       1. Click Backplot selected operations at the top of the Toolpaths Manager.

                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

    2. Click Display tool and Display holder on the Backplot dialog box to show the wire and guides during back-
         plot.

    3. Click Play on the Backplot VCR bar above the graphics window to run the backplot.
         The wire moves around the part for a single rough pass.

    4. Click OK on the Backplot dialog box to exit the function.

Exercise 6: Changing Toolpath Parameters

Although the simple contour toolpath you just created will machine the part, additional options in Mastercam Wire
can make your machining more effective. Change parameters and update the operation to include these new set-
tings.

                                                                                                   15
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       1. Click the Parameters icon in the Toolpaths Manager for the Wire Contour operation.

       2. Choose Wire/Power from the Tree View pane.
       3. For Pass 1, enter 0.035 for the Wire Overburn.
       4. Click the up arrow next to Pass 1 to enter values for Pass 2.

       5. Enter the following values for Passes 2, 3, and 4:
                 l Pass 2: Set Wire Diameter to 0.2 and Wire Overburn to 0.02
                 l Pass 3: Set Wire Diameter to 0.2 and Wire Overburn to 0.01
                 l Pass 4: Set Wire Diameter to 0.2 and Wire Overburn to 0

            Note: As the passes get closer to the final part shape, the wire cuts less material and the overburn
            decreases.
       6. Choose Cut Parameters from the Tree View pane.
       7. Set the following parameters on this page (see following graphic of new Cut Parameters values):

                 l Enter 3 for Additional skim cuts (before tab). These additional passes create a better finish on the
                     part.

                 l Select Tab and enter 1.0 for the Tab Width. Creating a tab on the part keeps it attached to the stock.
                 l Set Cutting method to Reverse. Instead of cutting in one direction and re-threading the wire, this

                     option makes the wire go in the opposite direction at the end of each pass.

                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                             Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

      Note: Notice the change in the cut list. The toolpath motion now includes four passes around the chain and a
      short move to cut the tab.

 8. Choose Stops from the Tree View pane.
      Because you added a tab cut with a stop on the Cut Parameters page by selecting the Tab option and setting
      the Tab Width, some of the options on the Stops page are already selected.

 9. Select As glue stop for the output stop code.
      A glue stop is an optional stop (using an M01 code) that pauses the machine before the tab cut, and allows
      the operator to secure the part to prevent dropout after the tab cut.

10. Choose Leads from the Tree View pane.

                                                                                                17
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

      11. Select Line and arc for the lead in and Arc and line for the lead out.

            Starting and ending the toolpath with arc motion reduces the possibility of leaving a burr on the part.
      12. Enter 0.125 for the Arc radius and 60 for the Arc sweep on the entry and exit moves.
      13. Select Maximum lead out and set the distance to 0.3.

            This option shortens the lead out move, instead of forcing the wire to travel from the end of the contour to
            the cut point.
      14. Click OK to complete the parameter changes.
      15. Click Regenerate all selected operations in the Toolpaths Manager to update the contour toolpath with
            your changes.

      16. Choose File, Save to save your part.

  Exercise 7: Backplotting the Updated Toolpath

   Use Backplot to verify the changes you made to the contour toolpath.

                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                                Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

    1. Click Backplot selected operations.
    2. Click Play to run the backplot.

         The wire moves to the end of the contour, leaves a tab, travels back and forth around the part during the
         skim cuts, then cuts the tab.

    3. Click OK to complete the backplot.

Exercise 8: Posting the Toolpath

Post processing, or posting, refers to the process by which the toolpaths in your Mastercam part files are con-
verted to a format that can be understood by your machine tool's control (for example, G-codes). A special program
called a post processor, or post, reads your Mastercam file and writes the appropriate NC code. Generally, every
machine tool or control will require its own post processor, customized to produce code formatted to meet its exact
requirements.

    1. Click Post selected operations at the top of the Toolpaths Manager.

                                                                                                   19
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

       2. Set the post processing parameters as shown. These settings will ask if you want to save the NC file and will dis-
            play the resulting file in your default text editor.

       3. Click OK.
       4. Select a location for the NC file and click Save.

                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                Mastercam Wire Tutorial--1: Single Contour Toolpaths

    5. Mastercam Code Expert opens in Editor mode and displays the posted NC code. Scroll through the code and
         see if it meets your expectations.

    6. Edit the file and save if necessary.
    7. Close the Code Expert window.
Congratulations on completing your first Wire toolpath! The next lesson involves multiple contours.

                                                                                                   21
22
                                                 CHAPTER 2

                  MULTIPLE CONTOUR WIREPATHS

In addition to single contour wirepaths, Mastercam Wire allows you to cut multiple contours from a single piece of
stock in a single operation. You can select the parts as a group and then sort the chains to generate the toolpath
motion you want.

Goals

     l Select multiple contours.
     l Create multiple tabs and stops.
     l Use verification to check the toolpath.

Exercise 1: Preparing the Multiple Contour Part

    1. Choose File, Open and select the part file, multiple_contours.mcam provided with the tutorial.
         This part includes three contours, three thread points, and four mounting holes. The default Wire machine
         definition is already selected.

    2. In the Toolpaths Manager, expand Properties under Machine Group and click Stock setup.
    3. Enter the following values to set the stock boundaries and display them in the graphics window:

              l Click Select corners and select opposite corners of the rectangle surrounding the contours.
              l Enter 10 for the Z stock dimension.
              l Change the Stock Origin Z coordinate to 10.

                                                                                                   23
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

                 l Select Display and Fit screen to show the stock boundaries and include the boundaries when you use
                     the Fit to Screen function.

       4. Click OK to complete the stock setup. If necessary, right-click in the graphics window and select Isometric
            (WCS).

       5. Choose File, Save As and save the part under a different file name. This protects the original tutorial file
            from being overwritten.

  Exercise 2: Selecting Multiple Contour Geometry

   Instead of chaining each contour, you can quickly select multiple parts using window chaining.
       1. On the Wirepaths contextual tab, choose Contour.
       2. Right-click in the graphics window and choose Top (WCS) to view the part from above.

                                                                                                        24
                                             Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

3. Click Window on the Chaining dialog box.

4. Click at the first point and then drag to the second point shown in the following picture and click again to draw
     the window around the parts.

5. Click the thread point on the left part as the approximate start point.

                                                                                              25
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

       6. Click Options on the Chaining dialog box to access additional chaining parameters.

       7. Ensure that Break closest entity to thread point is selected.

       8. Click OK on the Chaining dialog box to continue to the toolpath parameters.

  Exercise 3: Entering Multiple Contour Toolpath Parameters

   The parameters for this toolpath are similar to the ones you entered in Lesson 1.
       1. Select Cut Parameters in the Tree View pane.
       2. Set the following parameters on this page:
                 l Select Tab and enter 2.0 for Tab Width. Creating a tab on the part keeps it from dropping out of the
                     stock.
                 l Select Make tab cutoff move with skim cut to make the toolpath motion more efficient.

                                                                                                        26
                                                                                                                       Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

          l Select Skim cuts after tab to add a finish pass after cutting the tab.
          l Set the cutting method to Reverse.

             The toolpath motion now involves two cuts for each chain, with the rough cut including the stop and the
             tab cut.

3. Choose Compensation from the Tree View pane.
4. Select Computer for the Compensation type, and set the Compensation direction to Left.
5. Choose Stops from the Tree View pane.
6. Select For each tab to add a stop code before the tab cut on each chain and As glue stop to add them as

     optional stops.
7. Choose Leads from the Tree View pane.
8. Set the following parameters on this page:

          l Select Line and arc for the lead in and Arc and line for the lead out.
          l Enter 0.5 for the Arc radius and 90 for the Arc sweep on the entry and exit moves.

                                                                                              27
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

                 l Enter 0.02 for the Overlap.
                     This option eliminates potential burrs by overlapping the start and end of the contour by the entered
                     amount.

       9. Choose Taper from the Tree View pane and set the Rapid height, UV trim plane, and UV height to 20.0.
      10. Click OK to finish entering the parameters. The Chain Manager opens.

  Exercise 4: Adjusting the Chains

   Because you selected the contours with window chaining, the chain order may not be what you would prefer for the
   toolpath. The Chain Manager displays after you enter the toolpath parameters so you can adjust the chains and get
   the toolpath motion you want.

                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                       Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

1. Click each Chain Point and Chain in the Chain Manager to see how Mastercam chained the contours by
     default.

2. Right-click in the Chain Manager and choose Sort options. The Sorting dialog box displays.

                                                                                              29
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

       3. Select the Y+ X- option in the third row.

            The red point indicates the start point and the arrow shows the sorting direction.
       4. Click OK to close the Sorting dialog box.
       5. Click through the points and chains again to see the new chaining order from right to left.
       6. Click OK to close the Chain Manager and the toolpath displays on the three contours.

       7. Save your part file.

  Exercise 5: Verifying the Toolpath

   Verification is different from backplot because it simulates material removal in addition to tool motion. The veri-
   fication displays in a separate window called Mastercam Simulator.

                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                       Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

1. Click Verify selected operations at the top of the Toolpaths Manager.
     The stock, wire, and guides display in the Mastercam Simulator window.

2. Right-click in the Simulator window and choose Isometric, then Fit to get a better view of the toolpath and
     wire.

3. Click Play at the bottom of the Simulator window to move through the verification.

4. After the verification is complete, right-click and choose Zoom Window. Draw a window around the center
     part to look at the results more closely.

5. Click Remove Chips on the Verify tab and then click on the middle part to see the slug drop out of the stock.

                                                                                              31
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--2: Multiple Contour Wirepaths

            You can click on the other slugs as well to see the final tool motion results.

       6. Close the Simulator window to return to Mastercam.
   Now that you have worked with single contours and multiple contours, the next lesson focuses on No Core
   toolpaths.

                                                                                                        32
                                                 CHAPTER 3

                          NO CORE TOOLPATHS

No Core toolpaths in Mastercam Wire remove all material within a boundary without producing slivers or slugs. The
wirepath typically starts at a pre-drilled hole in the material, and zigzags or spirals outward until all material within
the chained geometry is removed.

Goals

     l Use AutoCursor to select points.
     l Create rough and finish passes.
     l Use backplot to check the toolpath results.

Exercise 1: Preparing the No Core Part

    1. Choose File, Open and select the part file, no_core.mcam, provided with the tutorial.
         This part is a solid model with a hole in the center. The No Core toolpath will machine the four additional slots.
         The default wire machine definition is already selected, but you need to define a thread point for each slot.

    2. Press [Alt+S] to turn off shading, and view the wireframe geometry.
    3. Right-click in the graphics window, and choose Top (WCS) to rotate the view.
    4. On the Wireframe tab, choose Point Position.
    5. In the Point Position function panel, choose Thread Point.

                                                                                                   33
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

       6. Move your cursor to the end of a slot and notice the cursor change to indicate that you are selecting the cen-
            ter of an arc.

            Note: This is Mastercam's AutoCursor, which detects and snaps to points as you move the cursor over geo-
            metry. AutoCursor activates whenever Mastercam prompts you to select a position on the screen.

                                                                                                        34
                                                                                                                                          Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

    7. Select the four points shown in the following picture as thread points.

         Note: Placing the points close together reduces travel time between the slots.
    8. Click OK in the Point Position function panel to complete the function.
    9. Choose File, Save As and save the part under a different file name.

Exercise 2: Setting Up No Core Stock

Mastercam Wire can model stock based on many different shapes, including solid models, castings, and cylinders.
    1. In the Toolpaths Manager, expand Properties under Machine Group and click Stock setup.
    2. Set the Shape to Cylindrical, and set the Axis to Z.

                                                                                                   35
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

       3. Enter 30 for the cylinder height and 40 for the diameter.

       4. Click OK to complete the stock setup.

  Exercise 3: Selecting No Core Geometry

   All chains (except thread points) must be a closed shape for No Core toolpaths.

                                                                                                        36
                                                                                                                                          Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

    1. On the Wirepaths tab, choose No Core.
    2. Select each thread point and its corresponding slot. Select the chain for each slot close to its thread point.

         Notes:
              l If you were actually machining the part, each thread point would be the center of a pre-drilled hole for
                 the wire.
              l In the Chaining Options dialog box, make sure that Break closest entity to thread point is
                 unchecked.

    3. Click OK on the Chaining dialog box to complete chaining.

Exercise 4: Entering No Core Toolpath Parameters

No Core toolpaths can include a rough pass and finish passes. The rough pass typically removes almost all of the
material. The finish passes smooth out rough edges and can also take off additional material.

    1. Select No Core in the Tree View pane.
    2. Set the Rapid height, UV trim plane, and UV height to 40.0.
    3. Select Rough in the Tree View pane.

         Mastercam No Core wirepath offers six cutting methods for cleaning out the material. The best practice is to
         select a cutting method that follows the shape of your part. For this part, the default Parallel Spiral option
         works well.
    4. Select Finish in the Tree View pane.
    5. Select Enable Finish to activate the default finish pass parameters.
    6. Set the Compensation type to computer for the finish pass.

                                                                                                   37
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

       7. Select Start pass at closest entity.

            When checked, the finish pass begins starting with the closest endpoint of the closest entity at the end of the
            roughing wirepath. When cleared, the finish pass begins with the first entity in the chain as it was originally
            selected.
            This option makes your toolpath motion more efficient
       8. Click OK to generate the toolpath.

       9. Save your part file.

  Exercise 5: Backplotting the No Core Toolpath

   Backplot includes several tools for showing your wire motion.

                                                                                                        38
                                                                                                                                          Mastercam Wire Tutorial--3: No Core Toolpaths

    1. Click Backplot selected operations at the top of the Toolpaths Manager.
    2. Select Quick verify from the Backplot dialog box.

         This option displays a shaded path the width of the wire as the backplot progresses and gives you a quick way
         to check if all the material is removed from the slots.
    3. Click Play to run the backplot. The wire cuts each slot from the inside out. The shaded area under the tool
         motion confirms that all the slots are machined completely.

    4. Click OK to exit backplot.
The last lesson in this tutorial focuses on 4-axis toolpaths, which work well for parts with different contours in the top
and bottom planes.

                                                                                                   39
40
                                                 CHAPTER 4

                            4-AXIS TOOLPATHS

Use 4-axis toolpaths for parts that require the wire to be in a non-vertical orientation. These parts typically have dif-
ferent geometry in the XY and UV planes, or the same geometry in a different orientation, such as the gear used in
this lesson.

Goals

     l Select a different machine definition.
     l Learn about synchronization methods.
     l Use TECH libraries.

Exercise 1: Importing the 4-axis Machine

Before creating the 4-axis toolpath, you must import the 4-axis machine included with this tutorial.
    1. Open the 4-axis Machine folder included with this tutorial.
    2. Copy the following files:
              l GENERIC MAKINO 4X WIRE (TECH).MCAM-CONTROL
              l GENERIC MAKINO 4X WIRE MM (TECH).MCAM-WMD

    3. To the following folder:
              l C:\Users\Public\Public Documents\shared Mcam2019\CNC_MACHINES

    4. Copy the following Post file:
              l Generic Makino 4X Wire (TECH).pst

    5. To the following folder:
              l C:\Users\Public\Public Documents\shared Mcam2019\wire\Posts

The imported machine is now ready to be used for toolpath creation.

Exercise 2: Preparing the 4-axis Part

    1. Choose File, Open and select the part file, 4_axis.mcam, provided with the tutorial. If the part is not
         shaded, press [Alt +S] to turn on shading.

                                                                                                   41
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

            This part is a solid model with the thread point and chaining start points already defined.

       2. On the Machine tab, choose Wire, Manage List to select a wire machine definition.
            This option lets you select a different machine definition than the default Wire machine.

       3. Select GENERIC MAKINO 4X WIRE MM (Tech).MCAM-WMD from the machine definition list, and click Add.

            This Makino machine uses a .TECH library for the wire power settings, which you will work with in Exercise 4.
       4. Click OK to close the dialog box.

                                                                                                        42
                                                                   Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

5. Choose Wire and select the machine you just added to the list.

         The Makino machine definition is added to the Toolpaths Manager.
    6. Choose File, Save As and save the part under a different file name.

Exercise 3: Setting Up 4-axis Stock

Similar to Lesson 3, a simple cylinder is the best stock model for this part.
    1. In the Toolpaths Manager, expand the Properties under the Makino Machine Group and click Stock setup.
    2. Enter the following values in the dialog box:
              l Set the Shape to Cylindrical, and set the Axis to Z.
              l Enter 40 for the cylinder height and 70 for the diameter.
              l Select Display and Fit screen to show the stock boundaries.

43
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

       3. Click OK to complete the stock setup.

Exercise 4: Selecting 4-axis Geometry

For a 4-axis toolpath, you chain geometry in two planes: the XY plane (lower contour), and UV plane (upper contour).
Mastercam Wire uses synchronization to determine the wire motion between the two chains. The sync mode is typ-
ically determined by the part geometry, but Mastercam Wire offers several options:

l By entity: Matches the endpoint of             l By branch: Matches the contours by
   each entity. Requires both chains to             branch points. Requires 3D geometry
   have the same number of entities.                connecting the upper and lower con-
                                                    tours.
l By point: Matches previously created
   point entities on each chain.                 l Manual: Matches the chains of user-
                                                    defined areas.
l By node: Matches two or more para-
   metric splines by their node points.          l Manual/density: Matches the chains
   Requires each spline to have the same            and assigns a density for each chain. If
   number of node points.                           an area has small radii, use a higher
                                                    density for a better finish.

Note: A branch point is a position where the endpoints of three or more entities meet and where the chain dir-
ection can change.

    1. In the Wirepaths tab, choose 4 Axis.
    2. Press [Alt+S] to turn off shading and make it easier to chain the part.
    3. Select the thread point to the left of the part as the first toolpath chain.

                                                 44
                                                                                                                                              Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

    4. Select the lower purple contour to the right of the green point. The chain start arrow should be at the point.
         This is the XY plane for the toolpath.

         Note: Press [F1] and draw a zoom window to focus on a certain area of the part.
    5. Chain the upper contour starting at the green point. Both chains must go in the same direction and should be

         clockwise around the part.
         Note: Click Reverse on the Chaining dialog box to switch the chain direction.
    6. Click Options on the Chaining dialog box to access the synchronization methods.
    7. Select by Entity from the Sync mode drop-down list.

         This sync mode works for this part because the top and bottom contours have the same number of entities.
    8. Click OK to close the Chaining Options dialog box.
    9. Click OK again to close the Chaining dialog box and to open the Wirepath - 4 Axis dialog box.

Exercise 5: Entering 4-axis Toolpath Parameters

The machine definition you selected is connected to a .TECH library that contains all the power information for the
wire passes, including register settings, offsets, and feeds. These settings are designed for this wire machine and
control.

    1. Choose Wire/Power from the Tree View pane.
    2. Click the Tech button to change the power settings for this toolpath.

                                                                                                   45
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

            The Technology Database dialog box displays.
       3. Select Rough & 2 skim(s) from the Sequence drop-down list at the bottom of the dialog box. This matches

            the number of passes you will program for this part.

       4. Click OK to return to the toolpath parameters.
       5. Choose Cut Parameters from the Tree View pane.
       6. In the Tabs section, select Equal to make the UV and XY tabs the same size and enter 1.5 for the XY Tab

            Width.

       7. Choose Compensation from the Tree View pane.
       8. Set the Compensation type to Computer and set the Compensation direction to Left.
       9. Choose Stops from the Tree View pane.
      10. Select For each tab to add a stop code before the first tab cut on each chain and As glue stop to add them

            as optional stops.
      11. Choose Leads from the Tree View pane.
      12. Select Line and arc for the lead in and Arc and line for the lead out.
      13. Click OK to generate the toolpath.

                                                                                                        46
                                                              Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

14. Press [Alt+S] to view the shaded part with the toolpath.

  15. Save your part file.

Exercise 6: Backplotting the 4-axis Toolpath

Besides the backplot tools you've already used, you can backplot your tool motion in the same Mastercam Simulator
window as verification.

    1. Click Verify selected operations at the top of the Toolpaths Manager.
    2. On the Home tab, check Workpiece to shade the solid.
    3. Click Backplot to change to Backplot mode in Mastercam Simulator.

         The stock no longer displays in the window and the Backplot tab displays at the top of the screen.

                                                                                                   47
Mastercam Wire Tutorial--4: 4-axis Toolpaths

       4. Click the Backplot tab and select Enable Vectors to view the 4-axis wire positions as it moves around the
            part.

       5. Click Play at the bottom of the Simulator window to run the backplot. The wire moves around the part three
            times for the one rough and two skim passes.

       6. Click the Home tab, and select Workpiece to see the final part shape so you can compare it to the tool
            motion. The Workpiece checkbox toggles to view the part in different shades of translucency.

       7. Close the Simulator window to return to Mastercam.
       8. Save your part.

                                                                                                        48
                                                                                                                                                        Mastercam Wire Tutorial--Conclusion

                                CONCLUSION

Congratulations! You have completed the Mastercam Wire Tutorial! Now that you have mastered the skills in this
tutorial, explore Mastercam's other features and functions.
You may be interested in other tutorials that we offer. Mastercam tutorials are being constantly developed, and we
will add more as we complete them. Visit our website, or select Help, Tutorials from the File tab.

Mastercam Resources

Enhance your Mastercam experience by using the following resources:
     l Mastercam Documentation--Mastercam installs a number of helpful documents for your version of software
         in the Documentation folder of your Mastercam 2019 installation.
     l Mastercam Help--Access Mastercam Help by selecting Help, Contents from Mastercam's File tab or by press-
         ing [Alt+H] on your keyboard.
     l Mastercam Reseller--Your local Mastercam Reseller can help with most questions about Mastercam.
     l Technical Support--Our Technical Support department (+1 860-875-5006 or support@mastercam.com) is
         open Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. USA Eastern Standard Time.
     l Mastercam Tutorials--We offer a series of tutorials to help registered users become familiar with basic
         Mastercam features and functions. Visit our website, or select Help, Tutorials from Mastercam's File tab to
         see the latest publications.
     l Mastercam University--Mastercam University, an affordable online learning platform, gives you 24/7 access to
         Mastercam training materials. Take advantage of more than 180 videos to master skills at your own pace and
         help prepare for Mastercam Certification. For more information on Mastercam University, please contact
         your Authorized Mastercam Reseller, visit www.mastercamu.com, or email training@mastercam.com.
     l Online Communities--You can find a wealth of information at www.mastercam.com. For tech tips and the
         latest Mastercam news, follow us on Facebook (www.facebook.com/mastercam), Twitter
         (www.twitter.com/mastercam), or Google+ (plus.google.com/+mastercam). Visit our YouTube channel to see
         Mastercam in action (www.youtube.com/user/MastercamCadCam)! Registered users can search for inform-
         ation or ask questions on the Mastercam Web forum, forum.mastercam.com, or use the knowledgebase at
         kb.mastercam.com.

Contact Us

For questions about this or other Mastercam documentation, contact the Technical Documentation department by
email at techdocs@mastercam.com.

                                                                                                   49
  ATTENTION! UPDATES MAY BE AVAILABLE.
PLEASE REFER TO MASTERCAM.COM/SUPPORT

           FOR THE LATEST DOWNLOADS.
