Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                         Back to Homepage                             a

      7 months by cncdivi                                              4084253617

                                                                         Shop All Our Products

         Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Tool Data
         Management]

         CNC operations heavily rely on precise tool measurements in terms of
         length. CNC machinery requires data related to the length and
         diameter of the tools in order to accurately pinpoint where cutting is
         taking place. The CNC controller requires information about the tool's
         length in relation to an applied standard (for instance, the "gage line").
         Also, knowing the exact diameter of a tool is beneficial because tool
         diameters abide by a specific tolerance level that can impact the
         precision of the created parts. In this article, we will discuss how to
         measure tool length using methods such as touch off and tool setter.

         There are lots of ways to measuring tools for length ranging from ad

1 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         hoc just-in-time methods to more elaborate systems that involve tool
         presetters, tool setters on the machine, and potentially even tool
         management software. If you're running a shop, you'd obviously like
         to minimize the cost of managing the tool data as well as minimizing
         the chances the wrong data is in use when a part program is run. Just
         imagine what happens if the tool is actually an inch longer than what
         the controller thinks it is­CRASH!!!!

         In shops with more than one machinist, it's also vitally important that
         the whole shop be on the same page with respect to measuring tools
         for length. Otherwise, one machinist will do things one way, and the
         next machinist to try to run the job on the machine will do things
         another, and we may once again have a CRASH!!!!

         Measuring Tools for Length

         Let's focus on tool length data, and moreover, let's start out on the
         dead simple end of the spectrum. How do we go about getting the
         length offset?

         Touch Off

         The simplest way to measuring tools for length is to take a gage block
         of known dimensions, put the tool in the spindle, and start to lower the
         tool until you can no longer slide your gage block under the tool. Note

2 of 43                                                                         10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         that you don't want to just lower the tool onto the gage block­bad for
         tool and gage block alike!

         Instead pull the gage block out of the way each time, lower the tool,
         and then attempt to slide it back under. With this method of measuring
         tools for length you can determine exactly how far the tip of the tool is
         from whatever your gage block is resting on­vise jaw, machine table,
         or top of the part. You would then use this information to determine
         your tool length relative to some standard, and you'd enter that into the
         tool table on your controller.

         Another method of measuring tools for length is the paper touch off.
         Originally this was done with cigarette rolling papers, because they're
         very thin. I find it is convenient to use post-its, because they're in a pad
         that's about the right size. You want to stick the paper down between
         the touch off point and the whirling cutter using a little bit of oil. Lower
         the cutter until it makes the paper move.

         You'll be 0.002 ­ 0.005 or so above the touch off point, depending on
         your paper thickness. You want to use the same kind of paper every
         time so you can determine its thickness by experiment and thereby
         know how to correct the touch off for paper thickness.

         Let me state the obvious: the paper touch off and the automatic tool

3 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         setter mentioned below are the only cases I know where the touch off
         is performed while the cutter is moving. In all other cases the spindle
         should be stopped when measuring tools for length!

         There are endless variations on this method

         Tool Setter

         Okay, the next step up in measuring tools for length is to use some
         form of measuring device or tool setter instead of a gage block. With
         this method, you're going to put an indicator of some kind down, and
         lower the tool onto the measuring pad or tip of the indicator until the
         indicator needle goes to zero. There are also electronic indicators that
         light up at the right point. Here is a typical dial gage-based tool setter:

4 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                   A typical Z-Axis tool setter available from Amazon...
         Here is a typical video of a dial indicator touch off gage in use:

         Positive or Negative Length Offsets?

         You can set things up when measuring tools for length either way, but
         pick one and stick to it as your standard for your shop. Negative length
         offsets mean you're working "backward" from some reference on the

5 of 43                                                                      10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         table, fixturing (like a vise jaw) or part. Positive length offsets mean
         you're working "forward" from a fixed feature relative to your spindle.

         Positive offsets are often referred to as being relative to the "gage line".
         Gage line is a little more independent across machines, and is better
         suited to situations where the offsets will be preset, meaning they're
         determined off the machine before the tool is installed in the machine.
         The term "gage line" refers to a specific spot on the taper where tool
         zero is located by convention. For example, on a CAT40 taper, the
         maximum diameter of the taper is 1.75. On a CAT50, it's 2.75. It's
         straightforward to locate that spot and use it as tool zero on a tool
         holder.

         The thing to standardize in a shop is where tool length zero is, and
         from there, whether positive or negative offsets will be used when
         measuring tools for length. BTW, there are pros and cons to positives
         and negatives and whether to reference relative to the longest or the
         shortest tool.

         For example, some people like negative offsets because if the offset
         table is cleared, then every offset is 0, you won't crash a tool. In other
         words, the negatives make the spindle move towards the work, less
         negative is further from the work. Negatives are often more natural
         when referencing via touch off. But there are some significant cons to

6 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

      using a negative standard:

            1. It seems less "logical" to many because it works against the right
            hand rule coordinate system. The actions required to touch off are
            simple. But for anything more complex, you'll be scratching your
            head.
            2. The touch off becomes problematic with fixturing moving around
            the table. Do you touch off the bare table? Do you touch off the fixed
            vise jaw? What happens when you put a different set of vise jaws in
            the vise, let alone remove the vise and use some other fixture?
            When that happens, all of your length offsets are now invalid
            because their reference has been moved. Gage line (positive tool
            offsets) are referenced relative to the spindle, and so can't change
            like that.
            3. The aforementioned safety feature. If the tool offsets are zeroed,
            the machine just cuts air. If a minus sign is inadvertently forgotten
            and a positive value is entered, you just cut even more air. With
            positive offsets, if you enter a spurious minus, you get a crash.

         People like gage line or positive offsets when measuring tools for
         length because:

         1. Gauge length offset is "logical" (a long tool has a bigger offset

7 of 43                                                                        10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         value)
         2. Can be measured out of the machine with some sort of presetter.
         3. Literally can be used unchanged for years if the tool is an
         indexable face mill etc.
         4. How do you "touch-off" a curved surface?
         5. Is independent of fixturing on the table. With negative offsets, if
         you change or remove the fixtures, you've lost the touch off
         measuring point.
         6. Positive offsets let you manage all the other offsets more
         intuitively, because they're not tied to the reference. For example,
         you may have measured your workpiece height offline with a height
         gage and want to mess with the offsets around that without affecting
         your tool length offsets. With negative offsets, you have to keep your
         calculator handy and really understand the interactions of the
         various offsets and part dimensions. Note that if you like to measure
         parts and fixtures offline, it is often convenient to make Z=0 your
         table, and use the work offsets to account for the height of the top of
         the part above the table. You could even set a height gage on the
         table or touch off with a probe to measure and set that work offset.

         Most of the pros prefer gage line / positive length offsets because
         they're more productive through use of presetters and because you
         can carry the tooling around to any machine in a multi-machine shop

8 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

         and the offsets are constant regardless of the machine or the fixtures.
         The time spent touching off is completely eliminated with gage line
         offsets (or to be precise, it is shifted to a presetter and done once), and
         you can perform other tricks more easily. It's a very efficient method
         of measuring tools for length.

         Beginners find negative length offsets are great for measuring tools for
         length because the touch off is easy to understand, if not very
         reusable, and the percieved safety features of making a crash less
         likely.

         There are some methods to add a little more safety to positive offsets.
         For example, a subprogram can check for positive offsets that are
         shorter than some minimum and halt the part program if any are
         encountered. This will prevent operation with zeroed or negative values
         quite easily, for example.

         There are methods to add flexibility to a negative offset system. For
         example, if you use a toolsetter (see below) on your machine table, you
         don't have to worry about losing the touch off point because you
         change fixturing.

         Okay, one last bit of confusion. You can convert from one system to the
         other, at least in principle.

9 of 43                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Referencing Via Touch Off

          Let's step away from gage line referencing for a minute and look at
          referencing via touch off when measuring tools for length. In this case,
          you're using the DRO or Axis readouts from your controller to tell you
          the position of the tip. For this procedure to work, you need a reference
          with which to zero the Axis readout. There are two approaches to this
          problem. One is to use an actual reference tool, the other is that the
          tool setter is precisely calibrated so that you know that when it zeros,
          you are exactly 2 (or some other value) above the surface the tool
          setter is resting on.

          If you use a reference tool, set up your reference tool first, and then
          zero the Z-axis. You're ready for measuring tools for length. When you
          zero your other tools, the Axis readout will give you the tool length. For
          obvious reasons, you'd like your reference tool to be shorter than the
          other tools so that the tool length offsets come out positive. Even if
          your reference tool is quite long, it's just a matter of checking its length
          and then setting the Z-axis indicator to the appropriate value so that
          "zero" is in a place such all other tools have a positive length. For
          example, instead of zeroing with the reference tool, set a positive value
          that is always the same.

          It's important not to use an actual cutter as the reference tool. If you cut

10 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          with it, your reference may change as the tool wears. You might even
          consider using an empty tool holder (always the same one!) for that
          reason.

          If you use a tool setter of known precise height, you can touch set a
          short tool and decide where you want zero to be. You might also touch
          set an empty tool holder when measuring tools for length.

          Positive Offset Touch Offs (aka Turn Your VMC into a Zillion Dollar Height Gage)

          Let's say you've decided to use positive offsets, but you don't have a
          tool presetter. Or, you have the presetter and are using positive offsets,
          and you'd like to use your machine as a height gage to figure out the
          height of some feature on a fixture or part above your machine table.
          Both are straightforward.

          There is some number that represents your gage line tool zero being
          on the table. In other words, the distance from the table to the gage
          line, which if you've defined it as I did above for the CAT tapers, is the
          spindle face. The point is to standardize this number for all your
          machines. Let's say you pick a value of 15 so that when the spindle
          face is touching the table, you have Z set to read 15.

          How can we use this for measuring tools for length?

          Start with measuring a positive tool table offset for a tool of unknown

11 of 43                                                       10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          offset. Mount the tool and do a touch off on the table. The difference
          between your standard value for tool zero (15) and the touch off "Z"
          value is the tool table offset for that tool.

          To use the machine as a height gage, enable the tool height offset for
          the tool you're probing with. Now the machine's Z readout is the same
          as a height gage readout relative to that probe tip!

          Since you can now use your machine as a height gage, you can use it
          to measure the height of some feature, like a fixed vise jaw, that you
          want to use for tool length offset touchoffs because it is inconvenient o
          reach the table. Given the height of the feature, its easy to adjust the
          touch off to once again wind up with a positive tool length offset.

          Are we getting too confusing yet? Probably. The important thing is to
          pick a standard method when measuring tools for length and then use
          it constantly until it is second nature. Master the simple stuff before you
          try to get fancy.

          Work Offset Touch Off

          Okay, let's assume you've got your tool table filled out with a bunch of
          tool offsets. Let's moreover assume you've used positive offsets. You
          want to make sure your work offset for Z is also properly set. One way
          to do this is to keep a "tool" that is an edge finder of some kind that can

12 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          be used to find an exact position in Z.

          For example, you could mount a dial indicator in a tool holder, and
          make it your reference tool. Give it a position in the tool table. Give it a
          tool length offset that measures a positive offset when the dial is
          zeroed. Stick it in the machine. Select the reference tool's length offset.
          Bring it down until it zeros on the top of part, and then set your Z to
          whatever you want the top of part to be. Z=0 for top of part is very
          common so that any positive Z is inside the part. Z=height of part is
          also common. Either way, between having the correct work offset and
          the correct tool length offset, you machine can now precisely locate
          things in the Z dimension.

          Here is a good intro from Tormach on how to put all of these concepts
          together in Mach3 when measuring tools for length:

13 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                          Be sure to pick up Part 2 of the video as well!

          Probe-Style Tool Setters (also called tool touch setters)

          The most sophisticated tool setters are based on probing-style
          technology, and are integrated with the machine's controller. These tool
          setters let you press a button and have the machine automatically
          probe the tool's length (and sometimes diameter), and then the data is
          automatically entered into the controller's tool table. It automates the
          entire business of measuring tools for length.

          Here is a typical tool setter:

14 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Note how the probe is set up­we can both measure tool length by
          dropping down onto the probe tip, as well as diameter. Typically, the
          tool is spun in reverse at a slow speed while the measurement is being
          made. The reverse spin is so the tool doesn't cut the tool setter, and
          the rotation itself ensures the measurement of the lowest hanging
          insert or cutter tooth.

          Note that the probe software or the machine controller will usually have
          parameters that let you decide whether the probe sets up the tool
          length offsets in the table as positive or negative offsets.

15 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Are tool setters the ultimate measuring tools for length?

          At this point, you may be thinking tool setters are the ultimate in
          automation and productivity when measuring tools for length. That may
          be true, but it really depends on whether your shop needs to optimize
          Cycle Time (the time the machine is running) or Setup Time (the time
          when the machine is idle).

          If you have a lot of Machine idle time, you probably should focus on
          reducing Setup time. A tool setter is ideal because it takes Setup tasks
          and automates them. On the other hand, if your machine is busy all the
          time and you need more production from it, while your operators have
          available idle time, you may want to try Tool Presetters to take this
          problem off the machine table and reclaim that time.

          In Part 2 (below), we'll talk about Tool Presetters among other things.
          For more information about optimizing Cycle Time versus Setup Time,
          see our CNC Machining and Manufacturing Cookbook, and
          especially our article on Cycle Time vs Setup Time.

          Part 2: Tool Presetters, Tool Data Management, and the Importantance of
          Consistency of Tool Lengths for Chatter...
          Getting Organized and Systematic About Tool Management

16 of 43                                                                           10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          How does one get their Tool Management organized? Remember, you
          have to manage this data both from the standpoint of the Shop Floor
          and the Design Office, even if you have a small business and the two
          share the same desk. The two generally have slightly different
          concerns. In the Design Office, its a matter of making sure you have
          access to what tooling is available on the Shop Floor as the CAM work
          is being done. You don't want to specify tooling your Shop Floor
          doesn't have. On the other hand, the Shop Floor is going to be more
          worried about all the details needed to make sure the job comes off
          accurately and efficiently. That involves a lot more than just knowing
          what tooling is available, because you want to optimize your setup
          time. Therefore, you also have to keep up with all the offset data and
          make sure its loaded into the machine correctly so it knows what to do
          with the tools in its changer.

          The first step is to standardize what you're doing in terms of offsets, as
          was mentioned in Part 1. The second step is have a system for
          managing the information. That system can range from some means of
          record keeping to some fixed process and even involve both. Any such
          system should make it easy for you to look back over some history and
          see how to optimize further. For example, which tools are you most
          commonly using? Can that information lead to a notion of standardizing
          some of the slots in your toolchanger across all machines? You'll want

17 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          to leave some slots open for job-specific tooling, but what is the optimal
          split between standard slots and special slots, and which tools should
          you put into your standard slots?

          At the simplest level, your machine controller's tool table is your record
          keeping system. But that's probably also the least efficient and most
          error-prone approach. To offset that, if you're going to use the
          controller, you should have a touch setter, and use it every time you
          load a new tool in the changer so that the controller's information stays
          up to date. If you're trying to keep up with it through manual data entry
          on the controller, that's asking for trouble, not to mention being time
          inefficient. The other issue is your machine controller isn't keeping the
          historical data you need to make other critical decisions, so even if you
          choose to have it be the source of truth for tool offsets, you're still going
          to need more.

          A step up would be a tagging system. As soon as a tool goes into a
          tool holder, you measure the offsets with your tool presetter and record
          them on a tag, which is then attached to the tool. Before launching into
          more discussion of managing your tool data, let's detour to talk about
          methods of tagging tools and tool presetting.

          Labelling and Barcoding Tools

          In order to reliably tell one tool apart from another, you need some kind

18 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

      of labeling system.

          There are a number of different approaches to labeling tools (or to
          be more precise, labeling a toolholder and its tool) including:

          ­ Sharpie: Get out your marker and write its serial numbers and offsets
          right on the toolholder.

          ­ Tags: Various kinds of tags are made that clip onto the taper or that
          can be hung or twist tied on the tooling.

          ­ Stick on Labels: All sorts of stick on labels are available
          from companies like ToolWall.

          ­ Laser Engraving: This is a more durable approach if you have access
          to a laser marker.

19 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Barcodes can make it easier to automate your tool management if you
          have the software to deal with the barcodes. Tags can either have the
          tool offset information written right on the tag, or if you have a more
          sophisticated system involving serial numbers or barcodes, you may
          use those to cross reference the information in some kind of software.
          One thing is for sure, any time a new tool goes into a holder, and
          anytime you find a tagless or unidentified holder, the offset information
          needs to be measured on your tool presetter.

          Serial numbers, whether via barcodes, hand written, or on printed
          labels, are important for a variety of reasons. If nothing else, they will
          uniquely identify the tool and holder for your inventory system, but also
          for your historical record that you will use to optimize your shop's best
          practices. While you may initially be focused strictly on tool offset data,
          take the opportunity to start tracking serial numbers too.

          Tool Presetters

          Tool Presetters are measuring arrangements that make it easy to
          measure the Tool Offset Data off the machine. They range from utter
          simplicity­a way to reliably position a tool holder on a surface plate
          plus a height gage­to the super sophisticated models with digital
          cameras, lasers, shrink fit induction heaters and probably someone
          makes one with an integrated espresso machine too! Here is a typical

20 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          super-simple height gage arrangement from Techniks:

              Techniks has a nice integrated tightening stand with surface
                      plate so you can use a height gage as a presetter...

          The simplest versions are little more than height gages with a
          repeatable way to secure the tooling. Such presetters are only able to
          accomodate Tool Length Offsets.

          The next step up would provide a means of rotating the tool so that
          diameter measurements could be taken. Such systems typically add a
          precision DRO and leadscrews for motion. Here is such a
          system Frank Mari had looked at (MariTool doesn't seem to sell it
          though):

21 of 43                                                       10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Glass scale DRO, leadscrew adjustment, dial indicators, and rotating
                                              taper holder...

22 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

           For diameter, rotate to maximum reading on the dial indicator, turn the
             leadscrew to zero the indicator, and read the diameter off the glass
                                                    scale...

          After that, the sky is the limit. The axes get motorized, data is collected

23 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          via computer, digital cameras allow you to check and measure the
          cutting edges precisely, etc. The most automated models let you drop
          in a tool, push a button, and invoke everything from automated data
          transfer to your machining center to label printing with barcodes for the
          toolholder or your tooling cart.

          The alternative to presetting is to use your machine with touch offs as a
          way to measure, so:

          Why Use a Tool Presetter Instead of Measuring on the Machine?
          Let's review our choices:

          ­ Measure on machine with a touch off of some kind

          ­ Measure on machine with a tool setter

          ­ Measure offline with a tool presetter

          Obviously a touch off is easy, but it's also the most time consuming.

          A tool setter is very easy, its on the machine, and you can use it to
          improve reliability by checking every so often for a worn or broken tool.
          There is no possibility for errors managing the tool data if you measure
          every time you load a tool or even every time you run a program.

24 of 43                                                      10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          So why use a Tool Presetter? Consider these possibilities:

          ­ Your machine may not have a touch setter.

          ­ You may be in a manufacturing situation where it makes better
          economic sense to keep the machine cutting at all times, and there is
          enough spare time for the machinists to use a presetter to take
          measurements offline.

          ­ There are various checks it may be convenient to make before the
          tool gets to the machine. For example, your tool crib may want to check
          indexable tooling before it is sent out to a machine.

          ­ Assuming you have no touch setter, and you want to share the
          tooling among machines, the data has to be tracked somehow. If
          you've got a tracking system, at least you only have to measure once
          on the presetter, and then the tool can be shared throughout the shop.

          ­ As we've discussed, if you will want to track tools by serial number
          and record lots of information beyond just the offsets in order to have
          all that information available for analysis of your shop's best practices.
          If you're going to do a little bit offline, it's easier to justify doing the
          presetting for tool offsets as well.

          There are more reasons for using a Tool Presetter, but that's a good

25 of 43                                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          start.

          How do we get the offset data out of the Tool Presetter?
          Depending on your presetter, a variety of options are available that
          range from:

          ­ You write it down on a tool tag or scrap of paper.

          ­ You type it into some other program.

          ­ The presetter gives you the data in some electronic way. Popular
          electronic formats include g-code programs that use G10 to load the
          offsets into your control, direct RS-232 (DNC) or other links back to
          your machine, and USB keys that can carry the data.

          Tool Data Management

          Getting back to Tool Data Management, by now you have some way of
          capturing tool data and keeping up with which tool holder and tool goes
          with which data. Or do you? How do you connect your offset data with
          each tool holder?

          Here are your choices in order of operational and organizational
          efficiency:

          1. Use a Touch Setter or other process and keep the offset information

26 of 43                                                                        10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          in the machine controller. As mentioned, you'll want to be diligent about
          always checking that data every time you move a tool into the changer,
          and you won't have the information available for analysis in any
          convenient form.

          2. Use a presetter, and write the offset data right on a tag that is
          attached to the tooling. When loading the tool in the machine, detach
          the tag and enter the data in the controller. Not bad, but there is room
          for error any time you write data down or have to key it in. You want to
          minimize that as much as possible.

          3. Use a presetter, and keep tool are serial numbered, whether by tag
          or engraving. Use the serial number to look up the offsets and get them
          into the controller. If your serial number software is clever, it will make
          sure that if the serial # has to be entered by hand, missing a digit will
          immediately produce a bad serial # and it can ask you to try again.
          Now you are starting to have the opportunity to record and track all the
          data against the serial numbers.

          4. Use a presetter, and keep tools tagged, but the serial number and
          possibly the offset data is encoded in a barcode that can be read with a
          wand. This is pretty cool, because the opportunity for manual data
          entry and errors has really been minimized. Once the data gets into the
          system correctly, and your presetter probably printed that barcode, you

27 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          should be good to go from there on out.

          5. Use some centralized way of managing all the tool data. When I put
          together the tools for a job, I can punch a button and get the right data
          for those tools loaded into my machine. This is the most sophisticated
          alternative. Instead of having to access physical tooling, you can work
          it all via software and then go get the tooling as identified on a job
          sheet from the same software.

          Example Tool Data Management from G-Wizard Editor

          CNCCookbook's G-Wizard G-Code Editor has some simple Tool Data
          Management functions to give you some idea what's possible. For full
          details on how it works, visit the GWE Tool Managment page. From a
          broad brush stroke standpoint, GWE has the facilities to cover each
          step in the process:

          Step 1: Determine What Tooling is Needed by the G-Code Program

28 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

           The Tools View scans your g-code program and makes a list of which
            tools are being used both by T# and by identifying comments if they

                                               are available...

          Step 2: Map the Tools Called for by the G-Code Program to Real

29 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Tooling in the Tool Crib

          You can see by the mapping options in the screen shot above that
          GWE can match tools up either by T# or by matching the comments. If
          you've set your CAM program up to use a particular set of tool names
          that it outputs as comments, and you've set up your GWE Tool Crib
          with the same comments as tool names, you are good to go. Here is a
          shot of the Tool Crib:

                                               The Tool Crib...
          Step 3: Collect the Tool Offset Information Via Tool Presetter

30 of 43                                                                  10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          If your presetter outputs a G10 program, you can load it right into
          GWE, run it in the simulator, and pull the offsets into the Tool Crib.

          Step 4: Load the Tool Offset Information into your Controller

          After you map tools in the Tool Crib to the T# slots needed by your g-
          code program, GWE generate a G10 program for those slots. Just load
          the G10 program into your controller and run it, and you've now loaded
          the offsets into your controller. The GWE Tool Crib serves as a central
          repository for tracking that offset information.

          What About the Design Office?

          Here you need to make sure the Design Office has access to some
          sort of Tooling Catalog so both the Shop Floor and the Design Office
          are on the same page about what Tooling is available. Something like
          G-Wizard's Tool Crib is one way to approach the problem. There are a
          number of packages available in the industry whose purpose it is to
          facilitate management of tooling inventory.

          Wear Offsets and Other Fine Tuning

          By the way, how can you feed tooling data back to the Design Office or
          use it to improve the efficiency of your Shop Floor? So you're running a
          job shop or small manufacturer. You frequently run parts that you have
          run before. Good tool data management can save you a lot of time and

31 of 43                                                                          10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          effort by managing not just the length offsets, but also the wear offsets.

          Let's say you ran the part the first time, and discovered it was coming
          out just a little too big by a few thou. A skilled machinist can tweak that
          in by adjusting wear offsets. If you record those wear offsets in some
          sort of Tool Data Management software, they'll be there for you the
          next time you need to run the job. Maybe you can even use a G10
          program to automate the process. Or, you can send that information up
          to the Design Office. Eventually they may figure out some
          commonalities in the data that tell them how to tweak their CAM
          programs so things are right the first time.

          You may even be able to tell when a machine is about to have a
          problem by monitoring what's happening with the wear offsets.

          You've also got all the data by job on which tools were needed. This
          can be cross-referenced and turned into standard tooling
          recommendations. From that data it's possible to understand the
          answers to what is the optimal split between standard slots and special
          slots, and which tools should you put into your standard slots. You can
          play with scenarios that involve minimizing the variety of tooling you
          keep in inventory, and have some idea what impact that will have on
          your jobs. You'll have a much better understanding of tool life and the
          cost of tooling if you can actually track which jobs each tool participated

32 of 43                                                                  10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          in and how many parts were made.

          Without good tool data management record keeping, it's impossible to
          answer those questions.

          Importance of Consistency of Tool Lengths for Chatter

          Phew! It's getting to be kind of a long article, but I want to leave you
          with one last thought about tool data management.

          Chatter is a subject worth long articles all by itself. For now, I just want
          to focus on consistency. Machine tools are actually quite consistent
          about chatter. It's a resonance effect or vibration, kind of like a tuning
          fork. Assuming your machine and tooling are in good working order
          (i.e. no bad bearings or spring washers in the spindle!), it is most
          prominently affected by four factors:

          ­ Spindle RPM

          ­ Tool Holder Type

          ­ Tool

          ­ Tool Stickout

          If you match those four factors up to exactly what they were when you
          got chatter, you are just as likely to get chatter again if your toolpath,

33 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          material, and workpiece apply the same or more force to the tooling.

          Can you see how consistent tool data management can help?

          If we use the same tool holder type every time, the same brand and
          type of cutter, and we standardize the tool stickout instead of just letting
          it be whatever it turns out to be when the collet is tightened, we are on
          to something. By keeping careful notes on these factors, we can begin
          to deduce which rpm ranges are most chatter prone and we can avoid
          them. We can also "tune the tool". Suppose you find a situation that is
          a total chatter box. The easiest thing to vary is spindle rpm. And BTW,
          make sure to vary it both faster and slower­you're just trying to get
          away from the resonance.

34 of 43                                                             10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          But if you have the time to experiment, you will discover that changing
          the tool's stickout is a way of tuning that resonance too. If you can find
          the amount of stickout that lets you maximize your spindle rpm to the
          high end of what your cutter can use, you'll get the best material
          removal rates. There are systematic experiments you can perform to
          map all this out, or you can keep careful notes whenever you're
          cranking up your speeds and feeds on a job to see how fast you can
          go. Either way, if you control those four factors, you will have a
          configuration with repeatable chatter characteristics and you won't
          have to guess.

          More Good Tool Setting Threads

          Still haven't had enough on Tool Offsets, Tool Setting, and the like? Try
          these threads:

          ­ PM Setting Tools

          ­ PM: Benefits of Gage Line Offsets

          ­ PM: Height Gage Presetters

          ­ PM: Beginner Intro to Tool Offsets and Presetters

          Interested in optimizing job setup? Try these threads:

          LinkedIn

35 of 43                                                          10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          Like what you read on CNCCookbook?

          Join 100,000+ CNC'ers! Get our latest blog posts delivered straight to
          your email inbox once a week for free. Plus, we'll give you access to
          some great CNC reference materials including:
          · Our Big List of over 200 CNC Tips and Techniques
          · Our Free GCode Programming Basics Course
          · And more!
          Just enter your name and email address below:

          Full Name

          Email *

           Subscribe

          100% Privacy: We will never Spam you!

          5/5 - (4 votes)

           Bob Warfield

           Bob is responsible for the development and implementation of the popular G-Wizard CNC Software. Bob
           is also the founder of CNCCookbook, the largest CNC-related blog on the Internet.

36 of 43                                              10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                         Learn more about Bob from his Author Bio page.

          Related Posts

          Use a          CNCCookb                     Truths and   28 Feeds     Thread
          Digital        ook 2018                     Lies About   and          Calculator
          Microscop      CAD                          China and    Speeds       [
          e to           Survey ­                     Manufactur   Features to  Comprehe
          Monitor        Part 2                       ing: A Rant  Try in G-    nsive
          Insert                                                   Wizard       Awesome
          Wear                                                     Calculator   Software ]

                         CNC

          Hardness       Manufactur                   What Do      Off Road     Slitting
          Conversio      ing                          The Top      Go Kart /    Saw
                         Technique

37 of 43                                                                                  10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

          n Chart,     s                              Shops Do  Mini-Sand  Speeds
                                                      That      Rail       and Feeds
          Calculator                                  Makes                Calculator,
                                                      Them                 Arbor, &
          & Tests for                                 Special?             Blades
                                                                           [Easy
          Rockwell,                                                        Guide]

          Brinell,

          Vickers

          and More

          Table of Contents

38 of 43                     New CNC Software Sale Underway.
                             Big Savings on great CNC Software.

                                                Sale Details

                                                                                                                                    10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                                                        Join our Newsletter
                                                      CNC Training Courses

                                                       27 CNC Calculators
                                                      GCode Editor / Viewer

39 of 43                                                                     10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                                                      Conversational CNC

                                                      World's Easiest CAM

                                                      More CNC Software

                             G-Wizard Thread Calculator:
                        Your Go-To Source for Thread Data.
                     Check out our Special Introductory Offer

                                      Try G-Wizard

             Search                                                        10/10/2024, 5:00 PM

40 of 43
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                 Get Better Feeds and
                     Speeds Instantly

          Get Better Tool Life, Surface Finish, and Material Removal Rates Fast.
           It's that easy. You can install and get results in a matter of minutes.

                           Try G-Wizard Now, It's Free!

                     Nah, I don't need any Feeds & Speeds Help

                                                      ?  Help Desk

                                                         How can we

                                                         help you today?

41 of 43                                                                            10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]  https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                                                                    All Material © 2024
                                                                   CNC Cookbook, Inc.

                                                                    Software

                                                                          GW Calc
                                                                         GW Editor
                                                                    GW Thread Calc
                                                                      GW Estimator
                                                                          Gearotic
                                                                    Conversational
                                                                         MeshCAM

                                                      CNC Programming / GCode

                                                           CNC Programming Courses
                                                                  G-Code Simulator

                                                               G-Code / M-Code List

                                                               Feeds & Speeds

                                                                        Calculator
                                                                    Free Calculator

                                                                           About
                                                                       Media Guide
                                                                      Privacy Policy

                                                                          Sitemap

                                                                      Learn

                                                                             Blog
                                                                    CNC With Jaime
                                                                   Information Hubs
                                                                  Free CNC Training
                                                                    Free Calculators

42 of 43                                                                                 10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
Tool Setter: Measuring Tools for Length [Easy Guide]               https://www.cnccookbook.com/touch-off-tool-setter-measuring-tools-for...

                                                      CNC
                                                      Dictionary

                                                           Free Trial

                                                      Contact Us

43 of 43                                                               10/10/2024, 5:00 PM
