Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

         4 Back to Homepage                                                TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                                   PRICES >>

                                                                                 a

                                                                               4084253617

                                                                        4 Shop All Our Products

         3 months by cncdivi

         Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding
         Solutions for Mills

         Introduction

         Workholding refers to any apparatus employed to securely grip your
         workpiece during its machining on the CNC machine.

         Closely related terms are "jigs" and "fixtures."

         A fixture holds your workpiece while it is being cut. A jig holds the
         workpiece and also guides the cutter. Given CNC machining, there's
         little need for jigs as the g-code guides the cutter, so the term is

1 of 35                                                                                          10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

         largely related to manual machining.

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET

         "Fixtures" are colloquially workholding manufacturingPtRoIoClEsSth>>at are

         custom made for a particular part or situation.

         There are two components to workholding:

         ­ The actual workholding device, such as a milling vise.

         ­ The method of locating your work holding devices and securing that
         workholding device to your machine. This includes the ubiquitous T-
         Slots but goes on to include modular fixture plates, 4th axis solutions,
         and much more.

         We'll go through the various methods of welding and assembly process
         locating the workholding devices and then follow up with a description
         of your choices for workholding devices.

         But first, let's talk about why Jigs and Fixtures are important and how to
         know when you need to make a special jig or fixture.

         Jigs and Fixtures: Show Me the Money

2 of 35                                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

         There's an old saying among machinists­fixtures are where you make
         your money. If you're good at making fixtures that save time, you'll turn
         a bigger profit. Or so the saying goes.

         But is it really true? Is it always true? Will every job benefit from fancy
         fixturing?

         I put together a Free Fixture Calculator that makes it easy to find out
         whether the fixture design is a good idea for your job or not. It will even
         figure out what the savings (ROI) will be if you build the fixture by
         comparing two different workholding options. This will give you a much
         better handle on your production costs.

3 of 35                                                                                    10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

         The free fixture calculator makes it easy to compare scenarios, and it
         even has one click options so you can factor in:

         · Repeat Runs: What are the savings once the fixture is made and the
            customer reorders another run?

         · Modular Fixturing: Setup time is saved when you can just drop a
            fixture on the pins with a modular fixturing plate and run.

         · Pallet Changer: Perhaps the ultimate is a pallet changer that allows
            you to load/unload a pallet while the CNC machine is working on
            another pallet.

         I've also made a video that walks you through the savings that are
         possible from fixtures and demos how to use the free fixture
         calculator to determine what the savings on particular scenarios might
         be:
         The essence of knowing whether production cycle times will improve
         with a fixture is in understanding how much they improve vs the cost to
         create the fixture. If the parts are simple and relatively few in number,
         a fixture may not be justified as production cycle times savings never
         outpaces the cost to build the fixture.
         I want to give a special shout out to Dave Bishop over at MiteeBite.
         Dave and the MiteeBite gang have forgotten more about fixturing than

4 of 35                                                                                    10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

         most of us will ever know, and he gave me some great suggestions to
         improve the fixture calculator. Also, if you're doinTgAKjoEPbMRcEICoTEsOSt Se>E>sCtiRmETation,
         be sure to check out our G-Wizard Estimator software. The Fixturing

         Calculator started out there, and there are many other useful

         calculators and functions in the software to help with job cost

         estimation.

         Now that you have the means to see how custom jigs, and fixtures can
         benefit your work, let's dig into the details of the manufacturing process
         and how it's done!

         Positioning for Workholding Devices

         T-Slots

5 of 35                                                                 10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

         T-Slots are the most common method of positioning and holding down
                       your workholding solution on your machine tool...

         T-Slots are by far the most common way of positioning and holding
         down your Workholding solution. They are simple, robust, and they
         work. To attach something to a T-Slotted table, use T-Slot nuts and
         suitable studs or other fasteners that fit the nuts:

6 of 35                                                                                    10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

                                               T-Slot Nuts...

         While they are common, they have some disadvantages relative to
         other solutions. Aside from the fact that T-Slots can collect chips and
         other debris, their biggest disadvantage is that it's hard to get your vise
         or other Workholding fixture back onto the table in exactly the same
         place and orientation. This can result in extra work every time a
         machine tool needs to be set up with new workholding for a new job.
         Over time, the cost of that lost production efficiency can be quite large.

         Just imagine, what if instead of having a tool changer and a tool table
         you had to dial in each tool every time it was used? Wouldn't that be a
         huge production efficiency block in your whole machining tool and
         workflow? Well, setup time can be a big productivity block too, and T-

7 of 35                                                                                    10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

         Slots are not helpful for that.

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET

         There are some solutions and manufacturing tools thPaRt'IvCeESbe>>en tried to

         make them a little better:

         Truing the Slots

         We can check the T-Slots of machine to make sure they run parallel to
         the axis motion by sweeping them with a Dial Test Indicator (DTI). If
         they don't, we can mill them true. A lot of folks hate the idea of
         intentionally milling their table, but if the T-Slots aren't true and you
         need them to be, it's hard to see what choice you have. But there is a
         choice that involves using something other than T-Slots as we will see
         shortly.

         Keyed Vises and Fixtures

         If your T-Slots are true, you can install keys on the bottom of vises
         or fixture plates that line up with the T-Slots. You can also install keys
         in the T-Slots that line up the edge of a plate or vise base. Doing so
         can save you quite a lot of time tramming vises and such, and it isn't
         hard to do, so it is definitely worth considering.

         The trouble is, these kinds of solutions will help with one dimension
         (typically the short dimension of the table is the Y dimension and is
         aligned perpendicular to the slots), but we still have the problem of

8 of 35                                                                         10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

         positioning along the axis of the T-Slot.

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET

         Fortunately, there is a better way in the form of FixturPeRSICuEbS->P>lates (also

         called Tooling Plates).

         Fixture Sub-Plates, Tooling Plates, and Modular Fixturing

         Fixture Sub-Plates (also called Fixture Plates or Tooling Plates) are
         plates that are installed on top of a T-Slot table to provide a new way to
         position and secure Workholding. A typical Tooling Plate looks like this:

                                        A typical Tooling Plate...

         Tooling Plates typically use a grid of holes that alternate between holes
         for precision dowel pins for positioning and threaded mounting holes
         for fasteners. If this grid is precisely positioned (or even if it isn't and
         the positions are precisely known) you have a very repeatable way to

9 of 35                                                                 10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          install Workholding on the plate. The dowel pins provide precision
          location that is repeatable to perhaps half a thouTsAaKnEdPtMhRE.ICTIEmOSaS>gE>iCnReETbeing
          able to drop a vise mounted on its own cnc fixture plate with dowel pins
          and fastener holes onto a Tooling Plate and have it be repeatable to
          half thousandth. If all your fixtures can drop onto the Tooling Plate, you
          can change the machine to a new Workholding configuration very
          quickly. The savings in time adds up to pay off the cost of such
          manufacturing equipment very quickly.

          With an air ratchet in hand, a vise can be installed on one of these
          fixture plates within a minute or two. A CNC Machine can be
          reconfigured in 5 or 10 minutes for a completely different job. And the
          skills required of the machine operators, as well as production costs
          such as the potential for mistakes, are greatly reduced if the milling
          fixtures don't have to be carefully dialed in each time. There are
          advantages for the creation of modular g-code too, because it can rely
          on the positioning grid of the Tooling Plate.

          If accuracy of more than half a thousandth is required, it is often better
          to use probing together with selected g-code parameterization to
          correct for the remaining error. You could try to dial things in more
          precisely by hand, but a probing solution can rely on things being
          nearly right to determine the last little bit of error correction that needs

10 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          to be applied in the g-code itself. For example, it's possible to apply
          rotation to the g-code based on a probes resultsTtAoKtEraPMmREICT(EtOhSaS>tE>'sCRaElTigning

          things to the axis motion) very precisely from an almost right situation.

          Tooling Plates are typically made of either Cast Iron or Aluminum,
          though there are steel ones available too. They can be purchased or
          made from scratch. For a complete guide, be sure to visit our Fixture
          Plate page.

          While we're on it, consider that a good tooling plate can also reduce
          the cost of human error in machining operations. If you're just dropping
          tooling into place on precision dowels, that's far less demanding than
          try to dial in the setup. So, there will be far fewer human errors with the
          simplified machining process.

          Modular Fixturing

          One other thing Tooling Plates help facilitate is Modular Fixturing. Once
          we have a fixed grid to rely on, we can purchase ready-made fixturing
          components that will fit the grid. This can save quite a lot of cost on
          your machining operations versus having to fabricate everything to
          some custom arrangement.

          Ball Locks and Other Quick Change Tooling Plate Solutions
          By now I hope you're seeing how much Setup Time could be saved by

11 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          using Tooling Plates. What could be better? Why there are at least two
          different ways to improve on the theme: quick chTaAnKgEePMRtoEICoTElOiSnS>gE>CpRlaEtTes

          and pallets.

          With a Quick Change system, the time required to deal with the dowel
          pins and fasteners is reduced through some kind of integrated solution
          that allows precise position and locking very quickly. One such is the
          Jergens Ball Lock system:

                  Ball Locks are a Quick Release system for Tooling Plates...

          With this system, you get precise positioning and secure holding with 4
          Ball Locks. Just align the plate to the sub-plate (which has the Receiver
          Bushings and is mounted to the table), drop the Ball Lock Shanks into t

12 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          slot plates in the hole, twist the bolt on top of the Ball Lock Shank, and
          you are done. Twisting four bolts and no fooling aTAroKuEnPMdREICwTEiOtShS>Ed>CoRwEeTl pins
          or extra fasteners is really quick and easy. Jergens talks about 30

          second cnc fixture change times lean production system which is

          very fast indeed.

          Pallet Changers

          The next step up are Pallet Changers. Think of them as power
          operated Tooling Plates whereas everything else we've talked about
          has been hand operated. A typical machine with Pallets allows you to
          be setting one or more Pallets up while the machine is working on
          another. A Pallet change operation cycles the old Pallet outside of the
          machine's milling area and brings the new one in. This minimizes the
          time the machine has to be offline and allows Setup to be done in
          parallel with machining operations.

          Some machines have what are called "Pallet Pools", which allow
          multiple pallets to be set up in advance and scheduled to run. A Pallet
          Pool can allow a machine to run unattended for quite a long time and
          can be a useful building block for total automation.

          Pallet Changers are typically only seen on Horizontal Machining
          Centers and some high end Vertical Machining Centers. They're
          definitely a full-on production feature that is fairly expensive, so the

13 of 35                                                                            10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          cost has to be justified by the need to keep the machines churning out

          parts constantly.                                             TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          Manual Pallets
          It's possible to gain a lot of the productivity of a Pallet Changer using
          Manual Pallets. We have some great articles on this:

          · Quickie Vise Pallets for Small Parts
          · Mittee Bite Clamps and Shopmade Pallets

          4th Axis, Trunion Fixtures, Tombstones, and Tool Columns

          Sometimes it is helpful to be able to apply another dimension to our
          thinking­in this case a 4th Axis. In CNC, a 4th Axis is commonly a
          rotary axis that is aligned to spin along an axis parallel to one of the
          machine's other 3 axes. On Vertical Mills, the 4th Axis is frequently
          parallel to X or Y, and is laid down. On a Horizontal Mill, the 4th Axis is
          also parallel to X or Y, but it is standing up. Both methods work great,
          but the horizontal mill's standing 4th axis frequently has more
          clearance available since the work is never trapped between the table
          and the axis.

          From a Workholding standpoint, a 4th Axis can be used to bring new
          orientations into play for two purposes:

          1. It allows access to more sides of the part so the mass production

14 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          processes and process machining can continue without having to flip

          parts around by hand.                                         TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          2. It allows access to more parts which may be arrayed around the 4th
          Axis.

          To find out more about these uses for Workholding, check out our
          excellent series on 4th Axis Basics.

          Conclusion

          I hope you can see that jigs and fixtures are important when assessing
          the production process. As manufacturing aids they can really help
          speed up the setup phase of the manufacturing process. It will be hard
          to keep spindle utilization up on your cnc machine without including jigs
          and fixtures in your manufacturing process. As such they are critical
          manufacturing tools to keep handy in your toolkit.

15 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

                A pair of milling vises sit side by side on a machine table...

          It's not too much of a stretch to say that the most popular Workholding
          Solution today is the Milling Vise. While there are many manufacturer's
          of such vises, the poster child is Kurt who shipped their first "Kurt Vise"
          in the 1950's.

          For much more in-depth coverage of Machinist Vises, see
          our Complete Guide to Machinist Vise. It's chock full of great info.

          Plates, Plate Fixtures, and Clamps

          As useful as vises are, they have a sweet spot for part size. They

16 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          have a difficult time with really large plate work, though as mentioned
          you can move the jaws to the outside positions foTAr KmEePMdREiIuCTmEOS-Ss>E>izCeRdET
          plates. And, they can also be less than optimal for very small parts.

          Sure, you can fit multiple parts in a set of Soft Jaws, but the space

          between adjacent vises and the space required for the vise mechanism

          makes it hard to fully fill the table with as many small parts as you

          might otherwise be able to.

          It's hard to achieve this dense packing of smaller parts with a vise, but
          a plate fixture makes it easy. This one uses Mitee Bite Pit Bull clamps.

17 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          The effect is not unlike tiny milling vises designed to fit each part just

          right.                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          When its time to machine large plates or a great many small parts, it's
          usually time to pull the vises off the table and use a workholding
          solution based on cnc clamps.

          Step Clamps

          The most common type of clamps are called step clamps because they
          have little steps machined on them. They're commonly used with T-
          Slots, although you can also use bolt them into a Tooling Plate. Here
          are some typical Step Clamps:

18 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          Step Clamp holding down plate, step block supporting end of clamp,
                                and bolt goes through T-Slot NTuAtK...EPMREICTEOSS>E>CRET

                                       A typical Step Clamp Set...

          Pictured is a typical Step Clamp Set. It can be handy to stock up on a
          an extra set so you've got more clamping parts to work with. By
          stacking the Step Blocks and using longer bolts, you can clamp
          workpieces that are quite tall. When using step clamps, keep the bolt
          close to the workpiece rather than the step block. Also, it can be helpful
          to angle the clamp down on the part by raising it up a step or two from
          level. You may also want to put a shim of soft material between the
          clamp and the workpiece if you want to avoid marring the workpiece.
          Soda can makes a great shim for this purpose if you slice out some
          strips with your snips.

19 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          Toe Clamps                                                    TAKE ME TO SECRET

          Step Clamps grip the top of the workpiece, which is sPoRmICeEtSim>e> s

          inconvenient because you might need to machine the area being

          gripped. Toe Clamps grip the side of the workpiece to give you full

          access to the top of the workpiece. There are a wide variety of different

          styles available:

          This toe clamp moves the clamp down a ramp when tightened to press
                                         against the workpiece...

20 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          These Mitee Bite Edge Clamps have an eccentric bolt head that forces
                         the hex against the workpiece as you tighten it...

          Tab Supports: Workholding Via CAM Software

          What if your CAM software could solve some major workholding
          problems for you, wouldn't that be neat?

          Turns out some CAM software can help out with workholding quite a
          lot by automatically creating tabs. Here's a video of MeshCAM's facility
          for creating tab supports to help machine a part that has to be
          machined on 2 sides and is awkward to hold otherwise:

21 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

           Using MeshCAM to add tab supports so you can machine a part on 2
                                                    sides...

          We offer MeshCAM at CNCCookbook because it's one of the
          easiest to use CAM packages there is.

          We offer MeshCAM at CNCCookbook because it's one of the
          easiest to use CAM packages there is.

          Double Sided Tape, Glue, Wax, and Low Melting Point
          Alloys

22 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          Some workpieces can be very difficult to hold because they're too thin
          or because their shaped so there's just no way toTAcKlaEmPMRpEICToEOnS.S>SE>CoRmETe
          solutions for these situations are in the form of Double Sided Tape,

          Glue, Wax, and Low Melting Point Alloys.

          The Glue needs to be something that will release when needed. For
          example, Super Glue releases at a particular temperature just like
          LocTite. The fumes from it are toxic, so take care to release with plenty
          of ventilation. Double sided tape can work great, especially for really
          thin materials.

          Wax and Low Melting Point Alloys (typically Bismuth alloys) can be
          used to embed the workpiece and create grippable area. When the
          machining is done, one can melt the wax or alloy away and save raw
          material for reuse.

          Vacuum Fixtures

          Need to apply uniform pressure to hold a part down? Maybe a vacuum
          fixture is the answer. Sea level air pressure is 14.7 lbs per square inch.
          A vacuum fixture pumps a vacuum under the part so that air is pressing
          down on every square inch of the top with 14.7 lbs of pressure. That
          can create considerable holding force if there is enough surface area
          regardless of the shape of the top or how thin the material may be. We

23 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          have a nice article on how to create your own vacuum fixtures that's
          very popular. For more in-depth information on vTaAcKuEuPmMREICwTEoOSrSk>Eh>CoRldEiTng

          visit our Vacuum Table Page and our DIY Vacuum Table Page.

          Perhaps the biggest disadvantage of vacuum fixtures is their hold-
          down force is limited by surface area­that means small parts can pop
          off relatively easily. When cutting forces exceed the hold-down force a
          vacuum table can pull, the part pops off and is generally ruined. This
          is a common problem for vacuum table users, especially for smaller
          parts that don't have much surface area.

          Until now, fixing the problem has been hit or miss, but our G-Wizard
          Calculator software now has the ability to limit cutting forces from
          the cutting tool to what your vacuum table can handle. Using this tool
          can be a real revolution for your own manufacturing operations process
          For more information, check out our article on this special feature.

          Chucks and Collets: For Round Parts

          While we typically think of machining round parts on lathes, there are
          many times when you may need to mill them as well. If you've got a
          Mill-Turn machine, it may not be necessary to put them on a mill, but if
          you don't, or if you just need to work on some round parts on the mill,
          you can use the same workholding solutions Lathes use. Just bolt

24 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          or clamp them down to your mill table. For example, use a 3 jaw chuck

          or a bank of collet chucks.                                   TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          Lathe Chucks are particularly common on 4th Axes because we often
          start from round stock.

          Every now and then we put round parts on the mill because it's just
          downright faster. Consider this setup for CNC machining round parts:

          I never would have guessed it, but Geof on CNCZone says the
          following 4-axis mill set up was able to machine these aluminum bars

25 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          to length, ensure the faces were square, and drill and tap a hole faster
          than he could do it in a lathe. You can imagine eaTAchKEoPMfREtIhCToEOSseS>E>rCoRuEnTd
          parts being a 5C collet and suddenly you fit quite a few more parts on

          your 4th Axis. There's probably room to do them on all 4 points of the

          compass on a rig like this. Talk about making the machining process

          more efficient!

          Expanding Mandrels, Arbors, and Studs

          Toe Clamps are one solution to keeping the workholding away from the
          milling, but we can do even better using expanding mandrels, arbors,
          or studs. The idea is to put an expanding cylinder in a hole on the
          underside of the workpiece and expand it to lock the workpiece in
          place. Once that's done, you can access the workpiece from every
          direction except the bottom without encountering the workholding (do
          remember where the mandrels are though so you don't have one in the
          middle of a pocket waiting to be hit!).

          Here is a cnc fixture using expanding studs:

26 of 35                                                                10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

                  Turn the bolt opens the expanding stud so it can clamp the
                                                 workpiece...

          There are a wide variety of these kinds of gizmos available for your
          workholding needs. They're particularly common for lathes, but as we
          mentioned, you can use lathe workholding all day long provided you
          find a way to mount it to your table.

          5-Axis Workholding

          5-Axis workholding, like most things 5-axis, is a whole other world. I
          won't go into any detail here other than to say you need different kinds
          of workholding when you can access a part from virtually any direction.
          It becomes more challenging in this kind of workholding that the
          workholder not get in the way of milling the part.

27 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          Like what you read on CNCCookbook?                            TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          Join 100,000+ CNC'ers! Get our latest blog posts delivered straight to

          your email inbox once a week for free. Plus, we'll give you access to

          some great CNC reference materials including:

          · Our Big List of over 200 CNC Tips and Techniques
          · Our Free GCode Programming Basics Course
          · And more!

          Just enter your name and email address below:

          Full Name

          Email *

           Subscribe

          100% Privacy: We will never Spam you!

           4.9/5 - (15 votes)

          Recently updated on July 18th, 2024 at 03:14 pm

             Bob Warfield

              Bob is responsible for the development and implementation of the popular G-Wizard CNC Software. Bob
              is also the founder of CNCCookbook, the largest CNC-related blog on the Internet.

              Learn more about Bob from his Author Bio page.

28 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

Related Posts

American's Easy          Carbide                                        Truths and Small
                                                                        Lies About Injection
Next Big       Guitar    Depot                                          China and Molding
                                                                        Manufactur Machine:
Boom:          Drawing   Milling                                        ing: A Rant Morgan

Manufactur for Custom Calculator                                                           Press

ing            Guitar    vs G-

               Bodies,   Wizard

               Part 2

               [CNC /

               CAD

               Project]

      Feed Rate Rough    CADCAM 3D Printing Way Oiler:

29 of 35                                                                                                    10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

          vs Cutting  Cutting:   Estimator                              Steel   Automatic
          Speed:      The        Update:
          Optimizing  Limiting   We Heard                               MusTcAlKeECPMRaEIrCTEOSSM>E>aCcRhETinery
          Your CNC    Factor in  Your
          Operations  Your       Survey                                 Body    Lubricatio
                      Shop?      Wishes!
                                                                        Panels  n [ + Vactra

                                                                                2 & More ]

          Table of Contents

                             New CNC Software Sale Underway.
                             Big Savings on great CNC Software.

                                                Sale Details

30 of 35                                                                        10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

            Join our Newsletter
          CNC Training Courses

           27 CNC Calculators
          GCode Editor / Viewer

31 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                     Conversational CNC                                 TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

                     World's Easiest CAM

                     More CNC Software

                             G-Wizard Thread Calculator:
                        Your Go-To Source for Thread Data.
                     Check out our Special Introductory Offer

                                      Try G-Wizard

             Search                                                                        10/10/2024, 4:56 PM

32 of 35
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

                 Get Better Feeds and
                     Speeds Instantly

          Get Better Tool Life, Surface Finish, and Material Removal Rates Fast.
           It's that easy. You can install and get results in a matter of minutes.

                           Try G-Wizard Now, It's Free!

                     Nah, I don't need any Feeds & Speeds Help

                                                                        ?  Help Desk

                                                                           How can we

                                                                           help you today?

33 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

                                                                        TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                               PRICES >>

          All Material © 2024
          CNC Cookbook, Inc.

            Software

               GW Calc
              GW Editor
          GW Thread Calc
            GW Estimator
               Gearotic
          Conversational
              MeshCAM

          CNC Programming / GCode

               CNC Programming Courses
                      G-Code Simulator

                   G-Code / M-Code List

          Feeds & Speeds

                 Calculator
             Free Calculator

                    About
               Media Guide
              Privacy Policy

                  Sitemap

                Learn

                    Blog
           CNC With Jaime
          Information Hubs
          Free CNC Training
           Free Calculators

34 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
Total Guide to CNC Jigs, Fixtures, and Workholding Solutions for Mills  https://www.cnccookbook.com/cnc-jigs-fixtures-workholding-solutions-...

              CNC                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET
              Dictionary                                                       PRICES >>

               Free Trial

          Contact Us

35 of 35                                                                                   10/10/2024, 4:56 PM
