Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

         Back to Homepage    TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                     PRICES >>

                                   a

                                 4084253617

                           Shop All Our Products

         Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the
         Cutter Where I Told It To?!??

         by Bob Warfield | Blog, CNC Basics, GCode, Software, Tools and Techniques | 0
         comments

         3 months by cncdivi

         To begin, it should be stated that this article does not
         focus on fixing issues with a non-functioning machine.
         There exist instances where commands, sent to a well-
         adjusted and configured CNC machine, do not yield the
         desired movements.

         How can that be possible?

1 of 23                                                                                 10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                The short answer is that this is caused because there
                are many approximations and assumptionTAsKmEPaMRdEIeCTEeOSvS>eE>rCyRET
                step of the way from your conception, to CAD drawing,
                to CAM program, to G-Code, to Trajectory Planning in
                the Controller, to the Servos or Steppers driving the
                axis, to the leadscrew and other components driving the
                table, and so on.

                There are various techniques that are used to minimize
                these errors, but it is useful to be aware of their sources,
                so let's look at a few of them. This diagram includes a
                few examples of each:

                        Sources of CNC Position Error...

         From Conception to CAD File: CAD Errors

         In your mind's eye, you see a very pure shape. Circles,

2 of 23                                                           10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                cylinders, smoothly flowing lines, all with infinite
                precision. The CAD program has to rendTeArKtEhPeMRsEIeCTEOSS>E>CRET
                notions with more limited means. Perhaps it can only
                represent lines, and hence arcs and circles become a
                series of short line segments that approximate the arc.
                 Perhaps it can represent splines, but the curve you
                have in mind is only approximated by the spline.

                Some file formats make fairly extreme assumptions.
                 Perhaps your carefully constructed 3D model, which
                had smooth flowing curves and other geometries, is
                being represented by the file format as a mesh of
                triangles which can only approximate the original model.

                In these cases, the CAD program is approximating what
                you've asked for, and there will be errors and
                assumptions made in that process. You have a little bit
                of control over it. You can choose to use a better CAD
                program. There are settings in most of the CAD
                programs that govern the degree of error their
                approximation is supposed to allow.

             From CAM to G-Code: CAM Errors

3 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                The next step in the journey from conception to making
                chips is to load your CAD model into yourTACKAEMPMREICTEOSS>E>CRET
                program. Even if they're integrated, there may not be a
                lot of difference in the end result. The CAM program
                wants to think about your model in a certain way to do
                its job. That certain way may or may not be highly
                compatible with what the CAD model can actually offer.

                If nothing else, the CAM program is applying cutter
                geometry to the model. There is no cutter geometry that
                corresponds to a mesh of triangles, so if that's what the
                model offers, the CAM program is going to approximate.

                Perhaps the toolpath algorithm itself is doing some sort
                of approximation of your geometry. Was it easier for the
                software engineer that wrote the toolpath code to think
                of your arcs as a bunch of short line segments? If so,
                he will have converted your arc geometry to line
                segments to facilitate his task.

                If he used enough line segments, the approximation will
                be accurate enough for your purposes. But, of course,
                there are tradeoffs. Fewer segments means faster
                algorithms. If you don't check your default tolerances in

4 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                the software, you may find the compromise between
                speed and accuracy chosen is not a goodTAoKnEePMRfoEICrTEOtShSe>E>CRET
                job you have at hand.

                Perhaps it was easier to ignore some commands that
                are available on your machine and controller and go
                with a simpler post processor. Many post processors
                have the option to view arcs as lots of line segments.

                Many will simulate canned cycles rather than having to
                be fully aware of the many varieties available on the
                many controllers out there (not to mention what optional
                parameters may be set on each controller).

                Does your CAM program have any notion of what your
                machine is actually capable of? Does it know, for
                example, what sort of acceleration the axes are capable
                of?

                Most CAM software does not. It accepts the
                programmer's idea of proper speeds and feeds (or
                worse many use a crude calculation of their own) and
                assumes that if the programmer says the feeds and
                speeds are okay that the machine can actually perform

5 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                at those levels.

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET

                Of course the feeds and speeds are based larPgReIClyESon>>
                notions of what the cutter can handle in the given
                material.

                Some operations are difficult because they will involve
                accelerations that the machine may not be capable of or
                that it may not be capable of pursuing accurately. A
                good example of a motion that's challenging for
                machines is helical interpolation.

                Our G-Wizard Feeds and Speeds Calculator
                specifically considers available axis acceleration when
                suggestion feeds and speeds for helical interpolation. If
                we didn't, it would be hard to do accurate interpolations.

                But most machinists are doing helical interpolation
                without worrying about acceleration. If they command it,
                the machine will do it, right?

6 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                Nope. There's a reason why this sort of motion is a
                common way to test a CNC machine. It TtaAsKkEsPMRtEhICeTEOSS>E>CRET
                motion with motions that make it most likely to expose
                vulnerabilities. To move in a straight line is not so bad.

                But to describe a circle requires two axes to work in a
                perfectly coordinate way, accelerating, decelerating, and
                even reversing direction to go around the full circle.

                If your CAM program generates g-code for a helical
                interpolation that is unaware of the machine's
                acceleration limits, the machine is simply going to do the
                best it can. If it happens to get around the circle without
                tripping a servo fault due to following error, you may
                think all is well, but your interpolated hole may not be
                very accurate.

             From G-Code to Commanded Motion:
              Controller Errors

                We're almost to the end of the journey as we present g-
                code to the controller whose job it is to convert that g-
                code into axis motions to cut our part. Unfortunately,
                we're also entering the realm where we may have the

7 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                least control over what's happening and very little
                understanding of what the controller is doTinAKgE. PMREICTEOSS>E>CRET

                We do know there are important considerations going
                on down inside the controller, though. We know, for
                example, that many manufacturers offer HSM options
                that make the controller more accurate for High Speed
                Machining. We know controllers will perform better if we
                give them arcs instead of thousands of tiny straight line
                segments because there is software available that will
                do arc fitting and machinists report that it helps. We
                know there are controllers like the Miceli and others
                that claim they can double the speed at which your
                machine processes a g-code program using the same
                servos and other components.

                How can Miceli offer a money-back guarantee to double
                your machine's speed using the same servos? The only
                possible answer is that somehow other controllers are
                wasting the potential of those components in various
                ways. The same g-code goes into both controllers, but
                one is able to interpret that g-code and turn it into
                motion commands to the servos much more effectively

8 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                than the other.

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET

                Consider the case of a zillion short line segmePnRtIsCEvSe>rs>us
                a smooth arc. Why is that harder and slower?

                The g-code for each line segment has to be parsed and
                evaluated by the controller as it is moving the cutter.
                 Say we are representing a 3 diameter circle to an
                accuracy of 0.0005 or half a thousandth. We can use
                G-Wizard's Chord calculator to figure out how many
                segments will be needed. A chord of height 0.0005
                (the maximum error) for a circle of radius 1.5, will be
                0.0775 long, will cover 2.9588 degrees of the circle,
                and hence we will need 122 segments (round up) to
                cover the whole circumference of the circle.

                Suddenly, our g-code program will have 122x as many
                moves as it would if a single arc move could draw the
                circle. Let's say we have a very nice VMC that can
                interpolate very accurately and we want the same hole
                accurate to 0.0002. Doing that will take 193 segments.

             What does that mean to the controller?

                If you have the HSM option on your Haas controller, it

9 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                can process 1000 blocks per second. At 150 IPM,
                your cutter can move 0.0025 per block ifTyAoKuEPMhRaEICvTEeOStSh>E>eCRET
                HSM option. Put another way, if you have blocks that
                move less than 0.0025 but still require a feedrate of at
                least 150 IPM, the Haas control may not keep up if you
                give it enough of those moves and something has to
                give. Now that's a nice control with the added cost of an
                HSM option to speed up its processing. Imagine an
                older control without an HSM option.

                Eventually, the control has to slow down the cutter in
                order to give it self enough time processing blocks to
                keep up. This situation becomes even more complex
                for 3D, which is also prone to lots of very short moves.

             What controllers like Mach3 which are at the
             low end of the market?

                Obviously they're going to process much more slowly
                than 1000 blocks per second. In addition, their
                trajectory planners are going to be correspondingly less
                sophisticated than that Haas control. And, they're going
                to try to operate by generating pulses via the parallel
                port unless a separate hardware motion control

10 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                solution is being used. Mach3 uses a ring buffer which
                it fills with velocity commands for each axTisA.KESPMuREfIfCiTcEOeSS>itE>CtoRET
                say that the ring buffer is subject to the same issues as
                having too many g-code blocks per second to process.
                 If either one gets too full, the machine has to be slowed
                down in some way or we've got a problem. There are a
                lot of other problems that can crop up in Mach3's ring
                buffer and parallel port system as well. Some are
                discussed in our series linked to just above about
                hardware motion control.

             Mechanical Errors: The Final Frontier

                It's been a long journey. I'm reminded of those crazy
                films in school that show the entire journey of a bite of
                food through the body or some such. We are finally
                near the end. The trajectory planner on the controller is
                commanding our stepper or servo to make a move.
                 Let's track through the different kinds of errors that
                accrue here.

                First up­servo following error and lost steps. These are
                both the same thing in the end of the day: something
                happens that causes the motor not to be able to move

11 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                the axis where it should be. Could be the force required
                for the motor to move exceeded its capacTiAtyKEaPtMRtEhICeTEOSS>E>CRET
                particular rpm it was running at. For whatever reason, a
                move was commanded and it didn't happen. With a
                stepper-based system, that motion is lost. The cutter
                will be off by the amount of the lost steps until such time
                as we re-home the machine (a good argument to do so
                frequently in my mind!). With a servo-based system, the
                servo will try to get itself back on track. It will try to
                speed up when the resistance is reduced to catch up to
                where it should be, for example. If it can do that before
                the following error (total distance it is behind) becomes
                too great, all will be well, though our cut can be off by up
                to the amount of the allowable following error.
                 Presumably we have set that small enough we don't
                worry too much.

                If we get more than the following error on a servo
                system, the machine faults and the job is stopped. This
                is a good thing because we know we had a problem.
                 On a stepper based system, it just keeps going. Given
                enough lost steps, things can get ugly. For example, if
                we lose steps each time we raise the spindle, the

12 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                spindle will drop lower and lower each pass, which
                means a deeper cut, which can lead to mToArKeElPoMRsEItCTsEOtSeS>pE>sC,RET
                and you can see how the vicious cycle unfolds.

                As an aside, folks that like to say lost steps should never
                happen in a properly designed and operated machine
                are just kidding themselves. It sounds great, but in
                practice, the forces required to move the machine are
                too unpredictable. Every temperature change means
                the gibs are fitting a little differently which will affect the
                axis friction. Use or non-use of a one shot oiler matters
                a lot. "Sticktion" means short moves (there's those
                darned little line segments versus longer arcs again!)
                have radically higher friction than longer moves. I've
                seen on my servo based system how often servo faults
                come along even when I detune the machine a long
                ways from "optimal". The only difference is the stepper
                guys never see a fault, they just wonder why their parts
                aren't as accurate as they expected sometimes.

                There are many other sources of error in the
                mechanicals. We may have backlash or other lost
                motion in our leadscrews. The leadscrew will have

13 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                errors in its thread. The length of the leadscrew (and
                the other machine components) will chanTgAeKaEPsMRtEIhCTeEOSS>E>CRET
                temperature changes. There is a long list of these
                things. The more sophisticated the machine, the more it
                will do to try to overcome these limitations. For
                example, the machine may have a set of glass scales
                mounted to each axis that give it continuous feedback
                on how far the axis is actually moving. The factory or
                service technicians may use a laser to precisely
                measure how far your leadscrew moves at every
                position of travel. This creates a leadscrew map that
                your controller can use to compensate for inaccuracies
                in the leadscrew. The machine may have temperature
                sensors located at various places to help it compensate.

                If your machine doesn't have all these whizbang
                accuracy gadgets, you may be able to use a probe to
                deliver a lot of the same benefits. See our article
                about RAMTIC manufacturing for some ideas there.

             Conclusion

                By now, I hope I've been able to show that even though
                you may have commanded your CNC machine to make

14 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                a move, and even though it may be in good working
                order, there are a host of subtle interactioTnAsKtEhPMaRtEICcTEaOSnS>Eg>CeRt ET
                in the way and cause your machine to move with less
                than the accuracy you desire. There are a lot of
                techniques to help you get around these obstacles
                including:

                ­ Being aware of the limitations of various CAD file
                formats like STL, and being on top of the tolerance
                settings used by your CAD and CAM programs.

                ­ Being on the lookout for sources of errors generated
                within your CAM program. Try to use a post and CAM
                that allows for true arc commands rather than lots of line
                segments, for example.

                ­ Being up to speed on your controller's limitations with
                respect to how quickly it can process blocks. Get
                 yourself a curve fit program to reduce the complexity of
                some of your g-code, perhaps.

                ­ Being aware of the many sources of error within your
                machine's mechanicals.

                Experienced machinists compensate for these things in

15 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                a variety of ways. They'll know that machines need to
                be warmed up before you can depend onTtAhKeEmPMREtIoCTEOhSoS>lEd>CRET
                tolerance. They come to know that they have to
                measure and compensate every nth part to deal with
                changes from tool wear, machine getting warmer, and
                so on. They'll have a good sense of what kind of
                tolerances they can hold on key operations, for example
                interpolated holes. They know how to use tools like the
                various offsets on the machine to compensate for
                differences between the features they measure on the
                parts and what the prints call for. And they will have
                honed the combination of their CAD/CAM and Post to
                get the most performance they can out of them over
                time.

                It's challenging to wring the maximum performance out
                of such a combination, but it can surely be worth it in
                many cases.

             Like what you read on CNCCookbook?

                Join 100,000+ CNC'ers! Get our latest blog posts
                delivered straight to your email inbox once a week for

16 of 23  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

          free. Plus, we'll give you access to some great CNC

          reference materials including:         TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                        PRICES >>

          · Our Big List of over 200 CNC Tips and Techniques
          · Our Free GCode Programming Basics Course
          · And more!

          Just enter your name and email address below:

          Full Name

          Email *

           Subscribe

          100% Privacy: We will never Spam you!

           Rate this post

          Recently updated on June 21st, 2024 at 07:58 am

                                    Bob Warfield

                                        Bob is responsible for the development and implementation of
                                        the popular G-Wizard CNC Software. Bob is also the founder
                                        of CNCCookbook, the largest CNC-related blog on the
                                        Internet.

                                        Learn more about Bob from his Author Bio page.

17 of 23                                                                                              10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

          Related Posts

                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                              PRICES >>

          CNCCo     Want to  Machini   Here's    V12
          okbook    Get      ng an     The       Espress
          2021      More     850lb     Scoop     o
          CAM       Done?    Pipe      on        Machine
          Softwar   Try the  Bending   Which     : La
          e         Pomodo   Die on a  Machine   Dolce
          Survey [  ro       4th Axis  s Hobby   Vita!
          What's    Techniq            CNC'ers
          the best  ue                 Have
          CAM? ]                       And
                                       What
                                       They're
                                       Making

          Manual    4 Ways   Compari   Part      How
          Lathe     Geomet   ng        Tumbler   Can I
          Survey    ry       Reamin    for       Figure
                    Affects  g vs      Vibrator  Out

18 of 23                                                  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

          Machini            Boring:   y  What
          ng and             What's
          What to            the       FinishTAinKEPMRTEICoTEoOSlS>tE>oCRET
          Do                 Differen
          About              ce?       g on the Use On
          It:
          Infograp                     Cheap My CNC
          hic
                                          Mill Or

                                          Router?

                                          (Part 1 ­

                                          Holes)

          Trackbacks/Pingbacks

          1. To the Max - Page 3 - CNCzone.com-The Largest
          Machinist Community on the net! - [...] [...]

          Table of Contents

19 of 23                                                                     10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                                                                                       TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                                                                              PRICES >>

                                      New CNC Software Sale Underway.
                                     Big Savings on great CNC Software.

                                                            Sale Details

                          27 Free Machinist's Calculators for you to
                                          Download and Use

          Check 'em out!

20 of 23                  10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

          Search

                  TAKE ME TO SECRET
                         PRICES >>

                      GCode is Complicated
                     G-Wizard Makes it Easy

          Try It!

21 of 23                   Start Here

          DON'T DROWN IN THE DETAILS OF GCODE. GET THE FUNDAMENTALS
                                           QUICKLY AND EASILY.

                                      - G-Code Editor and Simulator
                             - Conversational Wizards for Programming

                                  - Graphical Backplot of Cutting Path
                       - Debugger Makes Macro Programming Much Easier

                                                                                                                                      10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

                                              Try G-Wizard Editor Now, It's FrTeeA!KE ME TO SECRET
                                                                                              PRICES >>

                                             ?  Help Desk

                                                How can we

                                                help you today?

                        All Material © 2024
                       CNC Cookbook, Inc.

                        Software

                              GW Calc
                             GW Editor
                        GW Thread Calc
                          GW Estimator
                              Gearotic
                        Conversational
                             MeshCAM

          CNC Programming / GCode

               CNC Programming Courses
                      G-Code Simulator

                   G-Code / M-Code List

                   Feeds & Speeds

                            Calculator
                        Free Calculator

22 of 23                                        10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
Why Doesn't My CNC Machine Move the Cutter Where I Told It To?!??... https://www.cnccookbook.com/why-doesnt-my-cnc-machine-move-the-...

               About         TAKE ME TO SECRET
                                    PRICES >>
          Media
          PGriuviadcey
          PolSicityemap

                Learn

                    Blog
           CNC With Jaime
          Information Hubs
          Free CNC Training
           Free Calculators
            CNC Dictionary

               Free Trial

          Contact Us

23 of 23                                        10/10/2024, 5:18 PM
