Hello everyone. Thank you for joining.  This is another Digital Dimensions  webcast and my name is Cody Armstrong  and today we're going to be talking  about customizing Camwork post  processors.  So, I'm going to go ahead and jump into  it. First off, why would you customize  your post? Well, there are a number of  different reasons. Not all of them are  there. Uh but those are the most common  you'll see. Number one, it doesn't run  on my controller without some kind of an  error. And that's a common complaint we  get with postprocessors. You know, I  post from Cam Works, I run it out to my  machine, I hit go and it airs out. Um,  that's a common reason you have to make  a change in order for it to run  successfully on the on the machine. Um,  it doesn't post code with formatting  that I like, and that's actually a  common complaint. you know, I I prefer  to see um the spindle come on before the  work offsets or I prefer to see, you  know, my height offset, my uh coolant  come on in on a different lines. And so  I'm going to change it. I'm going to  customize it so it's it's more matching  to my preference of programming.  Um it can also help the operator work  better. So, if I have a list of tools,  if I have, you know, um an easy way to  navigate through the post, maybe it's,  you know, I separate each um section,  each tool into its own sections. Um I  can break it down to make it simpler for  the operator to read and also put more  information there. Maybe it's estimating  machine time, maybe it's the tools that  are being used, maybe it's a work  offset, but I can put a lot of  information in the post that may help  the operator or the person that's  setting it up.  And lastly, allows me to optimize  machine optimize machine movements. And  this is critical when um you know, maybe  it's making an extra move between every  tool change and you start to realize,  you know, after a thousand parts, I'm  wasting 10 minutes making this one move.  Well, I can go into my uh post and  customize it um to do the moves that I  see fit. Okay. So, lastly allows me to  optimize some of the machine movements.  Now, getting into some of the details of  post customization in Cam Works, there  are two programs you're going to need.  And actually, in reality, the only one  you absolutely need is a universal post  generator. Okay, the EC editor is nice,  but the universal post generator you  must have. It's uh how you compile a new  post. The EC editor, however, is a great  uh text editor for modifying post. It's  really just a text editor. Um you  there's lots of them, Notepad,  UltraEdit. Um, but EC Editor is good  because it's specific for post-processor  editing and it has a lot of specific  functions for that. Okay. Um, so those  are the two programs you'll need. They  are on the Camworks media. So, if you  have your CamWorks disc, if you go to  your all programs, you don't see either  one of these programs. Um, pop in your  Camworks disc. You'll see it under  optional programs to install. Okay?  You'll see the universal post generator.  If you install the universal post  generator, it installs both of these,  but it is an optional program. They're  not on by default. So again, if you  don't see these programs in your all  programs menu, um pop in your Camworks  disc, install those programs. Um again,  they're listed under optional programs  to install.  So, we know we need either the UPG or  the EC editor, but where would we use  one or the other? Well, the UPG um is a  simple interface and for the beginner,  it's probably the a good starting point.  It allows you to um start a post  relatively simply with a couple of  button clicks. You're not have to worry  about compilation errors or even  programming errors. Um it it's a very  easy to use, simple interface. Okay? And  so you can be up and and running with a  post-processor that's custom relatively  quickly. um but it has its limitations  and that's where we get into some of the  more advanced um concepts. If I'm trying  to write if then statements, I'm not  going to be able to do that through the  UPG, not simply anyway. Um if I want to  edit things like the library file, if I  want to do more advanced um programming  things, I have to go to the EC editor  because the UPG just doesn't support it.  But for moving things around, like I  mentioned before, you know, I want to  get rid of this one code or I want to  move this before this. The UPG should  work fine. Um, I'm going to give you an  example of both. I'm going to start off  with the UPG. We're going to create a  basic post. Um, and then I'm going to go  through editing it and making some  changes, but then I'm going to jump into  the EC editor and show why I might go to  the EC editor. What, you know, what  things can the EC editor give me that I  couldn't do with a UPG?  Um the UPG is always used to compile  whether you're using EC editor or not.  Um EC editor is just a fancy way of  editing the source file that's used to  create the post. Okay. Um but you always  use the UPG to compile and I explain  that in greater detail later on in the  webcast. Uh but you are going to use the  UPG no matter what. Okay. I don't know  if I mentioned this but the UPG stands  for universal post generator.  So, without any more details, I'm going  to go ahead and get into it. Um, what  I'd like to do here is call up the  software. And you'll see what I've done  is created a very basic part. Okay? And  I think it's a good idea to always start  off with a simple part that kind of  shows a lot of the common operations  that you have. So maybe if you're, you  know, always doing a boss feature,  you're always doing a face pass, it's  probably in your best interest to  include that in your test part. I'm  calling this a test part. It's very  basic though. I the reason it's basic is  I don't want to spend a lot of time  looking at a tons and tons of XY values.  I'm most concerned with how you know how  the startup of it goes, how it ends and  um you know the lines in between aren't  as critical. Okay. So I always make a  real basic part just to test my post um  for any changes I might make. So this is  the part we're going to be using to post  out and to look at our code. Okay. Now,  like I mentioned before, I'm going to  start off with the UPG.  And if I go into my start all programs,  the very bottom here, you'll see UPG.  And again, if you don't see this in your  all programs, make sure you uh install  it from the Camworks disc. You'll see it  under optional programs. And if I expand  that out, I see both the EC editor and  the UPG. And I'm going to go ahead and  launch the UPG.  Okay. And this is the interface. Again,  it's very friendly. It's very um you  know, it it's not a lot of computer  programming. It's it's simple in that  sense. It is a bit of a different  workflow though. In the case of, you  know, an EC editor, for instance, I'm  probably going to create a post from  scratch. I'm going to create a post  starting with a generic generic  controller, you know, and build on top  of it with whatever features I may uh  may use. And I use phon controller as an  example, but it could be anyone. Um  whereas if I'm getting if I'm working  with the EC editor, chances are I was  sent that file maybe from from digital  dimension support, you know, I called up  and I said, I need a post-processor for  a Fidal 4020 and the support rep sends  me this post and the zip file. I open it  up and I start editing it. Chances are  I'm going to be doing that with the EC  editor. And I'm going to go over an  example of that later. But with a UPG,  most of the time I create it from  scratch. I start from a example post and  just start building it. So that's what  I'm going to do. I'm going to start a  new postprocessor. Okay. File, new.  It's going to ask me what type of  machine, mill or turn. In this case, I  want a mill. I want it to be a phonuk  based controller. And remember, this is  just the base. Um, and then I want it to  be a haw. We'll call it a haw  controller.  Okay. Once I have that, I just hit okay.  And now I've opened up the haw source  file. Okay. And again, because this is  such a friendly interface, it's really  just a bunch of buttons that allow me to  customize it. Um, but this is the the  source file that's used to compile to  make your to your post-processor.  So, without uh going into too much  detail, you'll see here I've got details  like the machine name. You know, if I  had five HO machines, I probably want to  give it something else besides just HOS.  You know, hos VF3, hos VF3, number two.  Um, I can give it a lot of different  names.  Getting into some of the meat of this  though, um, if I go to the header tab, I  can set a lot of the default settings  for how it operates. You know, do you  want four decimal places for every  single dimension? You know, if I only  want three, I'll set it to three. Okay?  And right places mean places right of  the decimal. Um, I if I wanted leading  and trailing zeros, I could have those.  If I have a machine that only supports  I, J, and K for my arc types, I could uh  specify that here. Okay, so there's a  lot of setup options that are kind of  specific to the machine um and the  details of the machine. I'm just going  to leave this set the way it is. The  only change I'm going to make is I'm  going to allow it to do a full 360deree  move.  Okay. Now I'm going to go to the next  tab over miscellaneous.  And I'm going to specify, you know, I  only want  um three decimal places for my N series.  I don't want it to go N1, N2. I want it  to go N00001,  N002.  Um my max sequence number, let's add  another nine to this just so it allow it  to um go up to 100,000 lines of code or  just shy of that. And this is important.  Uh most commonly when you're working  with mold, if you really have a complex  three-axxis part or even four and five  axis where there's lots of lines of  code, you'll find that the sequence  number actually resets. So you'll go  9,999  and then back to one. Um and so if you  don't want that, come in here, add  another, and I can add another if I  wanted to um make it 9999,  9999, but that should be fine for this.  Um, another common option, I'm not going  to do it in this example, is sequence  numbers by tool. And what that means is,  you know, N1 will be tool one. And then  you won't see another N number until  tool two. So N2 will be in the same line  as tool two. And it's an easy way to  kind of break up the different tools uh  in my post.  Um, other than that, I'm going to go  ahead and move on. Um, getting into some  of the mill specific features. There's  not a lot of details I'm going to go  over in specific. Um, absolute and  incremental. A lot of the times you want  to control these from camworks. Work  coordinates, coolant. These are all  things I can control from cam works.  That's why I'm not going to spend too  much time going into them. Um, some  obvious option, display tool offset. You  know, those are things you're going to  need to have on, but I can see specific  scenarios where that may not be useful.  Maybe not for milling machines, but um,  you know, laser cutters, things like  that, where I may not need a tool  offset.  Getting into the interesting bit though.  Um, I have my mill sections all really  the same options. You know, do you want  coolant on in the in UV cuts? Do you  want it to be absolute or incremental in  UV cuts or Z-level cutting? So, there's  a lot of specific settings for specific  operations in Cam Works. Um, I'm not  going to worry about changing any of  these. Same thing for drill and tap. You  do you want it to dwell? Do you want  coolant on? All specific to an  operation. G83 PEX cycles, um, G84  tapping cycles, so on.  where we get to the interesting stuff is  some of the setup. Now, what it some of  the setup is is it allows me to make the  user uh punch in a number in Cam Works  that will end up in the post. Now, by  default, you'll see it's prompting for  program number and material thickness,  but those are the only two. See how  they're checked here? But if I wanted it  to uh prompt for program name, maybe I  have a naming series for all my programs  and I wanted someone to punch that in, I  could check this here. Okay. um  operation number, date. There's a lot of  information I could possibly um add into  this, but I'm not going to worry about  that right now. But the setup allows me  to establish things that are in Camworks  that I want to maybe punch in info for  that I want to also see in the post.  So, um getting into attributes, here's  one of the big things that I I find most  users want, and that's the ability to  right click in Cam Works and insert  either a optional stop or program stop.  Okay. And I can do that by just checking  make available in Camworks. And now what  it's going to do is it's going to create  a feature that allows me to rightclick  on a tool path and say insert post  operation and specify uh an M0 or M01,  an optional or program stop.  Now the sections tab is really where we  get into the meat of the post-processor.  How things are defined, in what order,  um in what fashion, you know, do I like  this before this and and and so on. So a  lot of the details you're find a lot of  the customization in the UPG is done  right here in this sections tab. Now the  way this works is in a source file  there's many sections. There's rapid  moves, cutting moves, uh drilling moves,  um tool defining moves, you know, for  instance in a tool change. Um and so for  all of that, they're going to have  different sections. So for instance, if  I click on tool here, you'll see a  number of sections pop up below. Okay,  initial tool change, initial preload  tool change, uh sub tool change, and  there's a lot of settings for those. So,  if I just click on one of them, for  instance, initial tool change, you'll  see the syntax for the source code pop  up here. Now, it's a little confusing at  first, but don't let all the uh  nomenclature confuse you. You know, tool  comment is just that. It's a comment  that someone typed in Camworks for this  tool. Okay? And just like you might  assume, M spindle direction is just  that. It's the M03 or M04 that I might  get um calling up turning on my spindle.  Okay, S is the spindle speed. Tool  number. M6, just like you might think,  is the M6 command. And so I can I can  begin to decipher some of these things.  Even though it's it's, you know,  computer programming to a certain  degree, um it's not very complicated  programming. So it's easy for me to  alter.  And so going through this a bit more,  you know, if I go to my miscellaneous  sections here, you'll see my start of  tape. Okay, start of tape is literally  the start of the program. And that's why  you'll see a percent sign for your very  first line. Okay, then I get into my  program number uh O, and then the  program number.  Okay. And then I get into the actual  specifics of the startup line. By the  way, this is just what they call a  safety line. Okay? Cancels out all the  previous commands that may have been up  from an old program or from the last  routine.  Now, if I wanted to add to my safety  line, you know, maybe I wanted a um  different command in here, I could  certainly just type that in. But you'll  notice the nomenclature is very  specific. It always starts with a colon  ton. Okay? Then most of the lines start  with an N. And the reason for that is  that's a number line. So, it's going to  add an N1, N2, or N in my case, N001,  N002.  Um, but if you don't want it to post  with the number line, you can get rid of  this N. For instance, I did that with  both the U program number and the very  first line. I don't want N1 percent  symbol. Okay, I just wanted to say  percent symbol, then my program number,  then it can start with N numbers. Okay,  now getting into this in a little more  detail. I'm not going to change anything  yet just yet because I want to show how  I can save it, compile it, view it in in  Cam Works, view the changes, and then  come back and and edit from there. So,  I've created this post, and let's just  say hypothetically that I did some uh  modifications to it, and I'm ready to  save it. Just like you might expect, hit  the save button. I'm going to give it a  name. We'll call it uh Haw  um  demo. Okay, so I call it HO demo. I hit  save.  That saves my source code. Now I need to  compile it to create a real  postprocessor. All I'm really doing here  is creating a source file. A source file  that's going to be used to compile to  make the real  post that I'm going to program to. I'm  going to program with in Camworks. So  that's my next step. I'm going to go to  file and you'll see here compile source.  Okay. And with that, you'll see it takes  me to the default folder for the UPG,  which is CUPG mill source. And in here,  you'll see all the different  source files, including my hos demo.  Okay, so there's my hos demo source. I  just hit compile and I get a message  post source compiled successfully.  Okay, now it compiled, but where did it  go? Where's the finished product? Right.  If I go to that folder, let's just  browse to it here. CUPG mill source.  There's no h demo ctl file. And if you  have any experience with this, um ctl  files are what I'm actually posting to.  Okay, the library and the source file.  These two files here are really just  used to make that CTL file. So, it's not  posting to the mill source.  I need to find out where it's posting,  where it's compiling all this and  putting it. Okay. And to do that, I'm  going to go into the preferences  for the UPG. Okay. So, file preferences.  You'll see the popup here. I have a lot  of details. The one I'm concerned with  is ctl path. Okay. This is the path that  it's saving your finished  post-processors. And this is important  because, you know, if I'm making all  these changes and then I go into Cam  Works and it's not changing and I don't  know why, I'd make sure that the place  I'm actually looking is this path. You  know, it's easy to make a simple mistake  like that and not be posting to the  right place or not be pointing to the  right place in Cam Works and not know  that the things you're actually changing  aren't being reflected. Okay. So, it's  important to know where it's saving your  finished post. In this case, it's the C  UBGCTL.  So if I go into that, we'll go see UPG.  Here's CTL. And there is my hos demo ctl  and lang file. Okay. And we're going to  get into this in the EC editor, but the  post is consists of multiple files. CTL,  lang, lib, source, ATR, and potentially  um general files as well. MILT, T32,  general T32. It does depend on the on  the post. And each file is necessary to  compile. You don't need all those files  to use the post, but you do need all of  them to compile it. And that's why when  you get a post-processor from Digital  Dimensions, it consists of many  different files. And that's in case you  want to open it up, change it, and  compile it yourself, you have everything  you need. So, I have this post, the CTL  file here. I'm ready to post to it in  Camworks.  So, calling up Camworks, you'll see here  I have this part. I have already got  everything generated. Okay, so I have a  pocket cycle and I have a drill and tap  cycle and I want to post using that one  I just created. So to do that I need to  specify you uh use this post instead of  my default and I do that in the machine.  So I double click the machine, I go to  the postprocessor tab and here I'm going  to browse to my post. Okay, I hit  browse. Right now that's the only thing  in there. So I'm going to hit pause  demo, hit open, and select. Okay. Now,  when I post this code, I'm going to be  posting it using the code that created  in the UPG here. Okay. So, I'm going to  hit post process  and we'll call it test part. That's  fine. I'm going to save it to the  desktop  and I'll run through it. I want to open  this up separately so we can take a  closer look.  Okay.  So, I'm going to double click the test  part. There is  my code. Okay. Percent symbol.  Then program number. Notice N0001  instead of N1 N2. Okay. And then just  going through some of this, you'll see  kind of the format of the code. Here's  my tool comment I mentioned just a  moment ago. uh spindle speed, what  spindle direction, work offset, and so  now I can begin to decide, you know,  what don't I like about this? Um I'm  scrolling through this quickly here. We  go down to the bottom. Uh some of the  drill cycles, for instance, you know,  maybe I don't like the fact that M9 is  coming at the same line of code as the  G80Z1. Maybe I want that to come before  this, just between this last XY value  and uh the retract and cancel for the uh  canned cycle. Maybe I want that to come  before it. Well, that's one of the  modifications that you can make. And so  this is kind of the process is you'll  you'll have the UPG up. You'll post out  in Camworks, take a look at the code,  decide what you don't like, go back to  the UPG, and make those changes. So I  just said, for instance, you know, I I  want to I want to display this M9 up  above the G80Z1. Okay. So I'm going to  go into my post. I'm going to find that  line. Okay. Now, I know this is the CAN  cycle. This is the end of the drill  cycle. So if I go back to my UPG and  under sections, you'll see drilling as a  section.  And if I click on drilling, you'll see  all the different drilling sections  including  in drill cycle.  Okay. And drill cycle has again T colon  or colon T colon N number G80 G90 Z  operating rapid plane which is a  variable in Camworks and then my M9. And  this is really what I want to get rid  of. I actually I want to move it up.  Okay. So to do this I'm literally just  going to start typing in a new line  above  that one. Okay. So colon  and  and then I can actually just cut and  paste this M9. Make sure you get the  open and close brackets. It's important.  Okay, so M9.  Okay, now I've made that change. I'm  going to go ahead and save it. I have to  recompile before I can test it. Okay, so  I've saved it. Make sure you save it.  It's an important step. Then I'm going  to go back to compile the source  again. And I'm going to compile hos  demo.  And now once I get this message, I can  actually go back and test it in  Camworks. So now I'm going to go back to  Cam Works. Now here's an important step.  It's one of the things that just one of  those odd things that works about  Camworks is you have to define the  postprocessor. Again, I've run into this  before. You have to go into the machine  and even though it's already pointed to  it, I have to browse, hit demo, hit  open, and select. It's just one of those  things that has to refresh the ctl file.  It has to look at it again. And so I  have to go back into the machine and  look at it and browse to it once more.  All right. So once I've made that  change, now I can post again.  We'll just  take a look at the code.  So, if I open up my part here,  you'll see if I go down to the drill  cycles,  my M9 is now coming before the G80Z one  point. Okay? And it's important to point  out, and I'm doing this across all drill  cycles. Remember, it's drill tap in this  case even counter sync. It's going to  call up now the M9 before the cancel for  the CAN cycle. Okay? So, that's kind of  the workflow. the process I might take  to make simple changes using the UPG um  to make modifications to my post so that  it's formatted the way I might like it.  Okay, so now that I have add that, let's  go ahead and move on. Show one more  example where I might use  um the UPG to make a simple  modification. And if I go up to the top  here, you'll see my safety line uh G0,  G90, G49, G20, Z0. Um, I'd like to add a  G80 canned cycle cancel to this as well.  Okay. So, again, I'm going to go into my  UPG  and under the miscellaneous, you'll see  start of tape. Okay. And in the start of  tape is that particular safety line. So,  you'll see the same G0, G90, G49, G  English metric, G20 or G19. And then my  Z0. I want to add a G80 to that. So, I'm  just going to click in there where I'd  like to place it. Right between these  two, you'll see the cursor. Then, I'm  literally just going to click the G80  button. Okay? And you'll see G80 get  added  to that line of code. Now, there's one  important thing I want to do before I  finish, and that is force it to show up.  And that's using an exclamation point.  When I use an exclamation point like  that, it's telling it whether it's modal  or not. Post-processors u support modal  commands just like in the controller  whether it's modal or not I want you to  show this G80 okay in other words  whether it's necessary or not I want to  show this G80 okay and that's why I put  the exclamation point there so now that  I've done that um I'm going to go ahead  and save it and again compile.  Okay. And now I'm going to test this in  Cam Works. So, I'm going to go back to  Cam Works. We'll browse to my updated  CTL file. Remember, it's just  overwriting the same one every time I  make a change and compile it again. And  now we'll post.  And now, if I take a look at the code,  you'll see a G80 is now in my safety  line. Okay. So, again, that's just the  general process of of making a  modification and viewing it in Camworks.  making a modification to my post,  compiling it, and seeing how it looks uh  in the posted code.  So, now that we've done that, I'd like  to move on  to another topic and particular the EC  editor.  All right, so now that we've gone over  that, I'd like to show you an example of  using the EC editor to get a little more  advanced into custom programming uh into  custom programming your own post. And I  might use the EC editor where, you know,  the UPG doesn't give me exactly what I'm  looking for. I'm trying to do something  a little more advanced, something that I  couldn't do in the UPG.  So, to give you an example, I have my  same part up here. Um, and what I like  to do is, you know, a lot of controllers  have an option for what they call  high-speed contouring, high-speed  machining, high-speed contouring, a lot  of different names for it. And the Phuk  style controllers, it's most often a G5  P or G5Q, some kind of command like  that. And in my example, what I'd like  to go over here is a standard FUK 6M.  I'd like to add a G5P10,000  to turn on this high-speed contouring  option. The problem I have is it doesn't  necessarily apply to all tool paths.  Okay. Right. I don't want high-speed  contouring on on every single especially  things like, you know, cont countersinks  or drill cycles. Um, so it needs to be  on demand. I need to be able to select  it, turn it on when I need it, and then,  you know, not use it, have it off when I  don't. Okay. And what I'd like to do is  create an attribute in the post that I  can tap into in the Camworks interface  and tell it to turn on and off. And I'm  going to turn off on and off this  high-speed contouring option. Now,  working with the EC editor is a bit  different. Um, I'm going to go ahead and  call up the EC editor. It's under my all  programs. See it right here, EC editor.  And I'm going to go ahead and open up my  post. Now what you're going to get,  let's go ahead and delete these files,  is a file like this. So you've contacted  DD support. They said, "Okay, you know,  I need a Phuk 6M controller for a mors."  Okay, and the support rep sends you  something like this, MSRC 110. Okay,  it's a zip file. What you're going to do  is extract this zip file.  I'm just going to put it in the post  folder here.  And you'll notice a post consists of a  lot more than just one file. Okay, I  have my CTL file. That's what actually  what CamWorks uses to post. But then I  have all the files necessary to compile  to make that CTL file. So I have my  source file here, my library file here,  uh my G general T32, and these are all  the things that I'm going to need to  compile to create my own custom host.  Now, the first step is I got to open up  the source file. So I'm going to go  ahead and I'll just drag open  get that right, my source file. Okay.  And the first step is I got to make sure  it compiles successfully first. I want  to be able to compile it, test it, and  use it in the in this way that it is  right now, just to see where it's at.  Okay. Before it can compile though, it  needs to know where all its files are.  So, if I go into, you notice on the left  hand side here, it says library files.  You'll notice that the library files  it's looking for this FUNU 6M.IB, LIIB,  it's pointed to the FM mill library  folder. Okay, that doesn't exist on my  computer. I need to tell it where that  file really is. Okay, so I'm going to go  into my COST folder where it actually  resides. I'm just going to copy that  path. I'm going to paste that into this  section of the source file. So, double  click over here. It takes me to that  section in the source file and I can  paste a new path in.  Okay. Now I also have to do that for the  include files. So you'll see include  files here. I'm going to paste that path  as well. But before it can compile, you  must go through and make sure that the  references that the post is looking for  are there and are accurate. Okay? So  those paths have to be right or else it  will not compile successfully.  So once I have that, I can go ahead and  hit save.  Okay. Then I can try compiling. Now  remember, like I said, you're still  going to use the UPG to compile. Okay,  so I have to go back to the UPG and go  file, compile source.  I'm going to compile this FUK 6M.  Okay, so I select FUK 6M. I select  compile. If I did it right, I get post  source compiled successfully.  Okay, so now I can post to that. I can  test it out. So I'm going to go into my  machine and browse. And there is my FUK  6M. Okay, in the UPGCTL folder, remember  we pointed to that in the UPG options.  So, I'm going to point to that Finenix  exam. I'm going to hit open and select  and we can post out our code.  So, taking a look at this, let's go  ahead and open this up. What I'd like to  do is add that high-speed machining  option just after the tool change. Okay.  So, before the spindle command, but  after the tool change, I want to add the  G5P P10,000.  Okay. And again, I want it to be an  option so that when I turn it on, it's  on, but it's off by default. Okay. And I  want it to go, you know, right in here.  So, to do that, I'm going to go ahead  and start by going back into the EC  editor,  and I'm going to open up the library  file. And the library file, in my case,  the general library file right here  is where I define a lot of the  attributes and calculation sections.  Okay, so if you see attributes here,  there's a long list of attributes,  all different variables I can tap into.  And then there's a long list of calc  sections. Okay, all the necessary  calculations for postprocessors.  Now, what I want to do is I want to add  a custom attribute.  Okay? And I'm going to call that custom  attribute. I'm just going to find a  random spot here to place it. We'll put  it right about here.  So, what I like to do is add a custom  attribute.  First off, notice I'm commenting out a  section. I just want to do that for my  organization sake. Now, by the way, an  asterisk starts a comment out section.  So, notice I start with an asterisk,  then a bunch of dashes. Just kind of  organizing things.  And I'm going to create my own  attribute. So I'm going to start with a  name. Adder name  equals  highspeed  attribute type  equals select which means it's going to  be a select box  attribute remark.  just a note. So I'm gonna say high-speed  machining.  Okay. Then attribute select. And what  this option is is do you want it to show  up in the mill part setup options or do  you want to show up in the individual  tool path options? So in my case, I'm  going to select no. I want it to not  show up in the setup. I want it to show  up in the individual tool path.  Then I'm going to go to the attribute  title  and that's going to be speed.  Then I get into my select strings. And  this is these are literally the things  I'm going to be clicking on. So I want  the first one to say off. I want this  off by default.  Okay. And then I want my second  attribute string  to say high speed.  Okay. So those are my two options. I  either have off or high speed. Kind of  go or no go. Okay. And then I'm going to  go to add or default.  And I want it to be one. meaning the  first selection is the default. In my  case, off. I want it off by default.  Okay. Um, lastly, add or used. This is  just whether or not it compiles it.  Okay. If I set this to add or used  equals zero, it's going to ignore it  while it's compiling. And then lastly,  add or end. Okay, it just ends the  attribute. So now I've created this  custom attribute. Okay. Now, what I need  to do is put that attribute into my  source file in the pertinent places. The  first thing I have to do is go back to  my source file here. Go back to the FXM  source file. I'm going to expand out my  operation types,  and you'll see the different operation  types. Now, I don't want to apply this  to drilling cycles. I don't see a need  to add high-speed machining options to  drilling cycles, but milling cycles can  definitely help from this. So for each  one of these milling cycles, these oper  IDs, I'm going to add a new list item.  Oper list equals highspeed, my variable.  Okay. And I'm going to add that to each  one of  the oper IDs. Okay. So I'm just going to  copy and paste that into all four of  these. That way it shows up no matter  what type of milling operation I'm  doing, whether it be a boss or a pocket  or any of those things. Okay. So now  that I've added that attribute to the  opera ids, now I can actually program it  into my code or where it's going to show  up in my code. So I'm going to go into  the sections and you'll see initial tool  change mill. I'm going to write again  just below  the tool command.  I'm going to write colon tic colon  brackets n  if highspeed  type speed  equals 2 then  g5 p10,000.  Okay. Then I have to end the if then  statement with an end if. Okay. Then  lastly  end of line. Okay. have to have the end  of line in. So that's my logic. I'm  saying if the high-speed option is set  to two, which is highspeed on, then post  a G510 P10,000. Okay. If the high speed  is set to one, it's just going to ignore  this. So now I'm going to do is go ahead  and copy this and I'll paste it into the  subtool change as well. I don't want it  just in the initial tool change, but  also the subtool change. Okay. So you'll  see now it's below the tool tool change.  um line in both sections.  So now that I've got that, I'm going to  go ahead and save it. And now we can  compile. Now, if I did this right, go  file, compile, source. It should just  compile successfully. There we go. Post  source uh compiled successfully.  Okay, so now that I've compiled it, I  can test it. So, I'm going to go back  into Camworks and just like I did  before, I'm going to go into my machine  and refresh the post. I'm going to  browse, go into my new post file, and  select it. And what I want to do is I  want to add this new high-speed  contouring option that I've created to  this particular contour mill. And like I  said before, my whole goal in this is I  want this to be an option in the  interface. I want it to be a push down  button that I can select and say, "Okay,  turn on these particular commands." And  to do that, I had to add it to the  posting tab. So, if I double click the  contour mill, you'll notice that  anything I added shows up on this  posting tab, including the speed  attribute that I created. Okay. And now  you'll see under speed, the default is  set to off. But if I hit the drop down,  there's an option there for high speed.  Okay. And so that's essentially what I  created. I created the speed attribute  and then I gave it two options, off and  high speed. Notice it's off by default,  which is what I want. I don't want this  to be an on option all the time. I just  want to be able to turn it on when  needed. Okay. So, I'm going to go ahead  and set this to high speed. Go ahead and  hit okay. And now I can post this. Now,  if you remember, there was nothing  between the tool change command T  whatever M6 and my spindle command. Now,  if I did this right, it should show up  right between those two. So, I'm going  to go ahead and yes,  and we'll take a look at that.  And so now you'll notice between the  tool change command and the spindle  command is my G5P P10.  Okay. And so that's really what I've  accomplished here. Uh to recap, let's go  back here. I added an attribute of  high-speed machining to the general lib  file. Then I went back to the source  file and added that  oper list to each oper ID. So I added  highspeed to each operation ID.  Okay. Then I went into the individual  section that I wanted to see this  command and created an if then statement  calling it up.  Okay. So in my initial tool change I  said if the high-speed steel or excuse  me highspeed is set to two then call up  the G5P10,000 command. Okay. And again I  added it to the subtool change as well.  And so now it's an available option  when I'm setting up tool path in  CamWorks.  Okay,  so that's pretty much what I had  planned. If you have any questions,  don't hesitate to email support  ddicad.com.  And uh thank you for joining.