4. Basics of CAM editing
Overview: From the model to the NC program
The modular structure of hyperMILL creates a flexible workflow from the model to the NC program.
Important elements of this workflow include:
1. C AM/CAD system
2. S pecifying the basic settings
Define the measurement system and storage directories for hyperMILL data. Configure the dia-
logue control, configure the tool and macro database and define further basic settings.
3. D efine workpiece origin and frame(s)
With the origin reference system (NC system), establish a connection to the machine coordinate
system.
Using a frame, define the current machining side and machining direction.
Use origins to control the NC output and apply origins when defining transformations.
4. D efine tool
Define a new tool or apply a tool from the tool database.
5. P repare manufacturing geometry (contours, surfaces, stock model)
Both 2D contours and CAD models can be used for 2D machining.
3D, 5-axis and turning jobs are based on a CAD model.
A stock model can be defined for various machining operations.
6. S tructure CAM project (define job list and jobs)
Define job and job list.
Use compound jobs to structure the workflow within a job list.
7. C ollision check preparations
Specify a milling area or turning area to define the collision-checked part of the CAD model.
Define a collision-checked clamping area to firmly fix the workpiece during machining.
8. C alculate and analyse toolpaths
Calculate toolpaths either directly in the job definition or in the hyperMILL browser.
Analyse toolpaths via the hyperCAD-S menu hyperMILL →A nalysis toolpath. For further informa-
tion, see the product documentation for hyperCAD-S.
9. S imulate machining and generate NC program
Simulate machining using the internal simulation, the internal machine simulation, the hyperVIEW
program, the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center or an external simulation program.
Output an NC program either via the G enerate NC file shortcut menu in the hyperMILL browser or
using hyperVIEW.
hyperMILL
30
Using the Project Assistant
Use the Project Assistant to create a milling project or MillTurn project in a predefined sequence of steps.
The following are defined in the individual steps:
• Model and machining technology
• NCS orientation
• Stock size and allowances
• NCS position
• Machining frames
• Names for joblist, milling area/turning area, stock as well as material and machine.
The steps can be in any order. Click O K to apply the settings you have defined. Click C ancel to close the
Project Assistant without savings the settings.
Starting the Project Assistant
Go to the J obs tab, right-click and select the N ew →P roject Assistant ... function.
Alternatively, use the hyperMILL Project Assistant menu to start the Project Assistant.
Define model and machining technology
Model and Process: Select M illing technology to create a milling project or M illTurn tech-
nology to set up a MillTurn project.
Use Surfaces to select the surfaces or solids to be machined.
Stock resolution: Defines the accuracy for calculating the tessellated bounding box used to create the
stock.
Define NCS orientation
NCS Orientation: Define the orientation of the NCS.
Use one of the options provided for milling: W orkplane, Surface or 3 Points.
Reverse the direction of the Z axis of the NCS (1) using Z direction →R everse.
Select an element (line, edge of the model) under X direction →S elect to define the direction of the X axis.
Alternatively, use the option 2 Points / Point to align the X axis.
hyperMILL
31

Rotate the X axis clockwise by the defined angle (2).
Rotate the X axis anti-clockwise by the defined angle (3).
Use one of the options provided for M illTurn: Workplane, Surface or Line.
Reverse the direction of the Z axis of the NCS (1) using Z direction →R everse.
Select an element (line, edge of the model) under X direction →S elect to define the direction of the X axis.
Alternatively, use the 2 Points or Point option to align the X axis.
Rotate the X axis clockwise by the defined angle (2).
Rotate the X axis anti-clockwise by the defined angle (3).
Z
Z
1 2 3
Define stock size and allowances
Stock: Define the size of the stock.
hyperMILL
32
Milling: Model length, model width and model height are displayed. Define the stock length, stock width
and stock height. The size of the stock is calculated automatically from the values defined for Offset X+ /
Offset X-, Offset Y+ / Offset Y- and Offset Z+/ Offset Z-.
The offset is displayed. (1) Offset in X direction, (2) Offset in Y direction, (3) Offset in Z direction.
X+
X-
Y+
Y-
Z+
Z-
1 2 3
MillTurn: Model length and model diameter are displayed. Define the stock length and stock diameter. The
size of the stock is calculated automatically from the values defined for Offset Z+ / Offset Z- and Radial
offset.
The offset is displayed. (1) Offset in Z direction, (2) Radial offset.
Z-
Z+
1 2
Click the icon to lock a value so that it can no longer be changed.
Click the icon to unlock a value so that it can be changed again.
Define NCS position
NCS Position: Define the position of the NCS.
Mode: Select whether the NCS should be positioned at one of the predefined B asic positions or at a
Userdefined position.
Use Basic positions to select a position R elative to the model (1) or R elative to the stock.
hyperMILL
33

Under Userdefined, select the O rigin directly in the CAD system.
Milling: NCS position relative to the model (1), NCS position relative to the stock (2).
1 2
MillTurn: NCS position relative to the model (1), NCS position relative to the stock (2).
Available basic positions are located on the rotary axis (3), the centre of the turning surface. The rotary
axis corresponds to the Z axis of the NCS.
(A) NCS position = Z-, (B) NCS position = Z+.
Defining the machining frames
Frames: Define the machining frames.
Global clearance plane: Define the height of the global clearance plane (1).
Use the C reate orthogonal frames function to create a frame for each machining side. If the function is not
enabled, an entry will be created only for the NCS in the hyperMILL browser.
Define whether the frames should be created R elative to the model or Relative to the stock.
hyperMILL
34
1
1
Defining names, selecting material and machine
Finalise setup: Define the names for the J oblist, M illing area / T urning area and the S tock. Select
Material and M achine from the list. The turning area is calculated with an accuracy of 0.005 mm / 0.0002
inch.
New elements are created in the hyperMILL browser based on the definitions. The most recently used
settings are applied.
hyperMILL
35

Specifying the basic settings
In the hyperMILL menu S etup →S ettings.
The S etup hyperMILL dialogue is used to specify the basic settings that are valid for all subsequent
actions and definitions in hyperMILL. The dialogue contains the following dialogue pages: D ocument,
Application, h yperCAD-S, D atabase, M aintenance and T ire (only available with respective product licence
for tire machining).
Document dialogue page
Units
Metric/Inch: The selected system of units applies to all input and output values.
Do not change the measurement system during CAM programming, as definition values
that have already been created will not be converted. Copying jobs between hyperMILL
documents with different measurement systems is not allowed.
Directories
Project: Create project-specific directories to store your generated files.
Use Path to select a project folder. All generated files are stored in subfolders.
If you select M odel path, all generated files will be stored in subfolders relative to the model file.
Joblist specific subdirectories: Subdirectories with the names of the job lists are used to store the gener-
ated files.
Global working space: All files generated are stored under the default path set under Application in the
Setup hyperMILL dialogue.
Feedbacks
Feedbacks visualise toolpaths, the start and end of machining in the vertical direction (top, bottom),
clearance plane, tool or coordinate systems.
Size: Enter the required factor (visualisation size).
Colours: Open the C olour setting dialogue, then click the respective colour to open the Colour selection
dialogue and define the required colour.
Colours
Set the colours for various hyperMILL elements.
Toolpath colours
Define the colours for G0 and G1 movements, collisions, tool axis and clipped toolpaths.
Feedback colours
Define the colours for visual feedback for the available elements.
Colours for list display
Define the colours for list display (featurelists).
Used by Feature Mapping: Colours used for feature lists from the Feature Mapping.
hyperMILL
36
Function
Max. number of origins: Limits the maximum permissible number of origins.
Use global clearance plane: Select this option to use the global clearance plane of the frame instead of the
clearance plane from the job definition. The formula value for the global clearance plane will then be firmly
linked with the C learance plane parameter for the job definition (greyed out).
To machine with a job-related clearance plane, adapt the C learance plane job parameter by right-clicking
and then clicking U nlink on the shortcut menu.
Prefer featurelist frame: Activate to copy the frame assigned to a feature to the job.
Requirement: During feature mapping (hole), the U se feature list function is activated and the F rame
creation mode has been set to 2D.
If the P refer featurelist frame function is not activated, the NCS is assigned to the job if its orientation is
identical to that for the frame orientation of the feature.
Use parameter: This function must be activated when local cycle parameters or user variables are to be
used as part of the job definition (also see Input field values).
Calculation
These settings apply to toolpath generation.
Display temporary graphics : Temporary toolpaths created during the calculation are shown on screen in
the interim and are then replaced by the final toolpaths.
Erase existing toolpaths: The next time a job is calculated, the existing toolpath is deleted. The newly
generated toolpath is output graphically on the screen.
Automatic geometry check: After a geometry that is to be machined has been modified, the outdated
geometry data is deleted from the cache before each calculation and the modified geometry is converted
again.
This function should always be enabled (it is active by default) in order to avoid faulty
calculations.
Notify changed geometry: A message is generated for the geometry to be machined before the job is
recalculated to notify the user that modified geometry data has been found and that the stored data will be
deleted.
Delete temporary files: Deletes the temporary files (*.tmp) created during job list calculation. Do not
select this option if you are having problems with a component that requires the assistance of your OPEN
MIND dealer.
Preserve reports: Save your report file in the folder defined on the Application dialogue page of the Setup
hyperMILL dialogue (default paths).
Check toolpath status
Check geometry: When geometry changes are made, the system checks whether the toolpath is still
up-to-date.
A modified geometry is displayed in the hyperMILL browser following a C heck toolpath
status. As this function uses up a lot of processing time, it is disabled by default.
hyperMILL
37

Locking
Use the L ocking →E nable option to disable elements so that they cannot be changed. The following may
be prevented:
• D eletion
• D eletion and geometry change
• D eletion, geometry and attribute change
: Click the icon to save all settings made on the D ocument dialogue page to a text file at:
C:\Users\Public\Documents\OPEN MIND\USERS.
Application dialogue page
Dialogues
Define the dialogue control mode (Modal/Modeless) as well as the dialogue tabs display mode (text/icons).
Show tooltips: Show the tooltips.
Message mode
Specify the information to be displayed as messages during job definition. These settings do not relate to
message windows you call up manually. Each message mode (Severe errors, Errors, Severe warnings,
Warnings, Infos) automatically includes the respective next ‘level’.
Model check
Automatic: Changes to the CAD model trigger a consistency check between the defined jobs and the
CAD model. If automatic model checking is switched off, it can be performed separately for each job via
the job or joblist’s shortcut menu. Regardless of this setting, a model check is always carried out before
generating the toolpaths.
Licensing
Licence status: Shows the status of your hyperMILL licences.
All products: Locked and available products are displayed.
Locked products: Only locked products are displayed.
Licensed products: Only available (and licensed) products are displayed.
If you work with network licences, you can reserve specific licences for your computer when you start
hyperMILL. Select the product that you want to lock and enable the L ock on start option.
For more information on network installations, refer to the installation guide for your product.
Show locked products only: When you create a new job, only those products that are available for your
computer (locked products) are displayed.
2D compatibility
Limit 2D jobs to NCS: You cannot select frames in 2D jobs. Select this setting if you are only going to
program on the NCS (program zero point) and your postprocessor is not suitable for multi-axis indexing.
Default paths
Paths for saving files generated with hyperMILL. Use the following icons to make changes.
Add/remove directory.
Change path.
Global Working Space: Location for storing all data that is generated by hyperMILL (toolpaths, models,
databases and so on). Changes are possible only using the hyperMILL SettingsWizard (hmInit.exe).
hyperMILL
38
hyperMILL search path: The directories are set by default but can be changed if required. Once paths
have been correctly set here, only the name of each file needs to be entered for all further processes.
Temporary files: Only temporary files needed within the program, including, for example, boundary files
(*.bnd), profile files (*.prf) and calculation files for individual cycles (*.omx).
Configuration files: User-specific default settings.
nightSHIFT: Path to the program n ightSHIFT.
Projects: Files will be stored in this directory if you have selected the P roject directories option on the
Document dialogue page of the Setup hyperMILL dialogue.
3DF files: Directory for polyhedron files (mathematical collision models for calculating toolpaths).
Hmrep files: Directory for temporary geometry data.
Stock files: Directory for stock files in*.STLor*.VISformat.
Toolpaths: Directory for toolpaths with information that is required to generate an NC program.
Backup files: Directory for*.hyperMILLbackup files.
Report files: Directory for report files with messages output from the program during toolpath calculation
(error messages, warnings and so on).
NC files: Directory for NC files (postprocessor run).
Export- / Import files: Directory for the exported or imported jobs of a job list.
Macros: Directory for macro files.
CPF files: Directory for Customised Process Feature files.
Programming tasks: This is only shown if the corresponding licence has been purchased and after launch-
ing tire machining.
AddIns: Not used currently.
Performance
Use all CPU resources for cycle computing: The majority of cycles support multi-core processors and
perform calculations in parallel. If this option is selected, all of your computer's CPU resources will be
used for cycle computing. Please note that the simultaneous use of hyperMILL for interactive work during
a calculation may slow down the system. If the option is not selected, a part of your computer's CPU
resources will be available during cycle computing for simultaneous hyperMILL use, which means that
toolpath calculation may be slowed down as a result.
Backup
The A ctivate option allows hyperMILL to create backup copies of the CAD model files used (*.hmc/
*.e3). Backup files are created as:
[Original file name]_ [n].hmc.hyperMILL
To open a backup file in hyperMILL, change the file extension to*.hmc/*.e3.
Number of backup copies per document: Specifies the number of backup copies per CAD model file. At
present, you can create up to 999 backup copies. Each time you save the model file, a backup copy
is created. Once the maximum number of backup copies is reached, the backup copy created first is
overwritten.
Save backup in user-defined folder: Backup files are saved in a user-defined directory. This directory is
either the directory displayed under D efault paths →B ackup files or (if the P roject directories option has
been enabled on the D ocument dialogue page) in the corresponding p roject directory.
Save backup in same folder as original: Backup files are saved in the same folder as the original file.
hyperMILL
39

hyperCAD-S Document dialogue page
(Only for hyperMILL for hyperCAD-S)
Cutter path display
Tool axis size: Define the size of the tool axis.
Collision point size: Define the size of the collision points.
Point size: Define the point size of the toolpath points.
Line width: Specify the line width of the toolpaths.
STL file display
Use the value for the M ax. STL file size to specify the maximum size (MB) of the stock file (*.STL/
*.VIS)that can be displayed in the hyperMILL browser.
SolidWorks Document dialogue page
(Only hyperMILL for SOLIDWORKS )
Cutter path display
In the T ool axis size input field, specify the size of the tool axis.
In the C oll. point size input field, specify the size of the collision points displayed.
STL file display
Use the value for the M ax. STL file size to specify the maximum size (MB) of the stock file (*.STL/
*.VIS) that can be displayed in the hyperMILL browser.
Model changes
Enable the W arn if model has been changed option to receive a hyperMILL message informing you about
any model changes.
Database dialogue page
Settings Wizard / manage database projects: Opens the hyperMILL CONFIGURATION Center to manage
the database projects. A database project consists of a tool database, a macro database and a colour
table.
On the D atabase dialogue page, you can also specify whether to work with an application database
project, a global database project or a user database project.
Global or user database projects that were defined in the hyperMILL CONFIGURATION Center can be
selected on the Database dialogue page. Global database projects are identified by the suffix<G>.
The tool and macro database used and the colour table are displayed in the lower area of the dialogue.
Update tool states on start-up: Enable if the status of all external tools is to be updated after opening a
document.
Edit colour table: Specify colours for threads, ISO-fits and pockets using sample elements.
The information will be evaluated during Feature Mapping (Hole) and pocket recognition.
Create a new entry.
Adopt colour definition of example element via surface selection from the CAD model.
Thread: Select type, define name and feature class. Enable N ominal diameter option if the outer thread
diameter should be used.
Length: If the thread length is to be used to recognise feature information, select D iameter * factor or P itch
* factor. Enter a value for the F actor. Select the N one option if the thread length should not be used.
hyperMILL
40
Min. distance to bottom (Pitch * factor): Enable if the minimum distance to the bottom is to be used to
recognise feature information. Enter a value for the F actor.
ISO-fits: select description, define name and feature class.
Pockets: where necessary, enable tolerance option and specify value for upper and bottom tolerance.
Define the required type with bottom, side or plane. Define name and feature class.
Maintenance dialogue page
Cache for calculation data
Clear all: All geometry data is deleted from the cache. The entire geometry is converted again before the
next calculation.
Clear changed geometry: All changed geometry data is deleted from the cache. This function fulfils the
same purpose as the Automatic geometry check (dialogue page D ocument).
Configure the directory under: h yperMILL settings →A pplication dialogue page →D efault paths →H mrep
files.
Directory for temporary files
Delete: Deletes all temporary files generated by hyperMILL.
Configure the directory under: h yperMILL settings →A pplication dialogue page →D efault paths →T empo-
rary files.
User-defined defaults
Delete: Deletes all default settings saved with the S ave as default command (see Dialogue control func-
tions).
Directory for backup files
Backup files, generated by hyperMILL in the configured folder: You can either Clear all backups or just
Clear act. model backups.
Configure the directory under: h yperMILL settings →A pplication dialogue page →D efault paths →B ackup
files.
Tire dialogue page
Only available with the relevant licence. See the information in the documentation for t ire machining.
Adjust paths
(Only for hyperMILL in hyperCAD-S)
On the hyperMILL S etup menu: Adapt the save paths for toolpath, 3DF and NC files to the current
settings. To specify the changes, go to Default paths on the A pplication dialogue page of the Setup
hyperMILL dialogue.
hyperMILL
41

NC system and frames
With the origin reference system (NC system), establish a connection to the machine coordinate system.
Using a frame, define the current machining side and machining direction.
Use origins to control the NC output and apply origins when defining transformations.
NC system
The NC system defines the position of the workpiece origin and the orientation of the machining axes
(XYZ).
The workpiece origin must match the reference point of the workpiece on the machine.
hyperMILL calculates all the toolpaths in the NC system. The NC system applies to an entire job list at one
time.
Define NC system
When a new (empty) joblist is opened, the NC system aligns with the world workplane. Before a joblist is
defined, the NC system must be adapted to the machining conditions. These changes can be made via the
joblist (Setup dialogue page) or the frame definition.
Frame
A frame defines the current machining side and orientation. In multi-axis indexing, a frame has to be
defined for each machining side. The assignment of the frame to a job takes place in the job definition.
(1) NC system
(2-4) Frames
X3
X1
Z1
Y1
Z3
Y3
Z2
X2Y2
F1
F3
F2
YZ
X
1
2
3
4
All frames must be defined before generating the toolpaths. Subsequent movement or
rotation will mean having to recalculate all tool paths affected by the change. If the NC
system is modified, then the entire job list has to be recalculated. If frames are modified,
the affected jobs must be recalculated.
Correct job definition and therefore machining can be achieved only if the frame is in the correct position
and orientation for the job, because:
hyperMILL
42
All definitions for the vertical machining area are in relation to the frame (top, bottom), clearance distance,
XY plane, horizontal stepover.
The frame shares responsibility for collision checking during machining.
Surfaces that cannot be recognised from the tool axis perspective (1) are not machined.
In hyperMILL, the first point of a toolpath can also lie below the level given by the height of the machining
side in the z+ direction. This generally means below the uppermost point in the model. The positioning
movements made by the machine axes up to this first point are not represented in the toolpath, but defined
in the postprocessor. An OPEN MIND postprocessor positions the rotational axes first, and only then
proceeds to the first point of the toolpath along the linear axes. This needs to be taken into particular
consideration during 5X programming, for example, when linking with the C learance mode →R adial option
or when linking triaxial toolpaths with differently oriented frames.
Define frame
1. In the hyperMILL browser, go to the Frames tab and use the N ew frame shortcut menu or
2.
 click the icon in the job definition on the Tool dialogue page
The Define frame dialogue consists of the D efinition and General dialogue pages. .
The C lamping position and F rame limit dialogue pages are also available if you open the dialogue via the
job list ( J ob list settings →N CS).
Definition dialogue page
Reference system
The frame origin coordinates are dependent on the reference system set here.
Move
Move: Move the frame origin.
Align
Reference, W orkplane: Frame origin and orientation are adopted from the active reference system or the
workplane.
3 Points: Specify the frame orientation with three points. Point 1 = origin, Point 2 = X direction, Point 3 = Y
direction.
MillTurn
Select required orientation (1) and/or set rotation around the X, Y, or Z axis (2).
hyperMILL
43

Angle
A, B, C: The resulting angle (Euler angle) is displayed and may be modified.
Zero point
X, Y, Z: The resulting frame origin is displayed and may be modified.
Vectors
X axis, Y axis, Z axis: Shows the vector components of the linear axes.
Select: Only available for hyperMILL for SolidWorks. Various elements can be used to define a frame.
Face, Plane, Sketch, Coordinate system: Select the required element directly in the graphics window.
View
Only available for hyperMILL for SOLIDWORKS.
Set frame: Sets the frame to the current view.
Define frame
Define coordinate system: Select an element in the graphics window and specify the origin of the coordi-
nate system.
Reverse the direction of the respective axis.
Change coordinate system
Move the coordinate system origin or project the coordinate system in the direction of the X, Y, Z
axis.
Bounding box
Position the coordinate system using a bounding box. Click the D isplay button to show the current bound-
ing box.
The colour of the bounding box corresponds to the default colour of the stock model (dialogue h yperMILL
settings →D ocument →C olours).
Enter the offset of the bounding box directly in the input line or define using the arrow keys.
Use the icons in the C hange coordinate system area to position the coordinate system at the required
location.
Associative Workplane
An associative workplane is linked in hyperCAD-S with the entities, selected for creation. Modifications
to the entities are carried over to the linked workplane. To use an associative workplane in hyperMILL,
proceed as follows:
1. A ctivate Parametric Modelling in hyperCAD-S,
2. select the desired F rame or Origin in hyperMILL,
3. activate the A ssociative workplane function on the dialog page D efinition and select the desired
workplane.
An associative workplane is marked with a lock symbol in the hyperMILL browser.
General dialogue page
Frame information
Enter the N ame , I D (ID number) and, if necessary, a C omment. All entries can also be changed later in
the frame list's tree structure.
hyperMILL
44
Global clearance plane: clearance plane of the frame. To change the default value, enter a new value,
right-click the left side of the dialogue header and select the S ave as default option from the shortcut
menu.
If you modify a frame later on, recheck all the jobs that use the frame. A frame is
not moved on a job-specific basis. Instead, the translation operations for the frame are
adopted in the frame definition and therefore in all the jobs that use the frame.
Clamping position dialogue page
The C lamping position dialogue page is only available via the D efine frame dialogue in the job list (dia-
logue page S etup →N CS.
Use the clamping position to specify the zero point for the simulation. The table upper edge middle point of
the machine model serves as the reference.
The Z axis of the clamping position must always be defined parallel to the Z axis of the NCS. If rotation is
required, use the N CS transformation function in the machine configuration.
Examples:
1. The C lamping position option is not enabled. The model and clamp are placed in the middle of the
table in the machine model used in the simulation.
2. The C lamping position option is enabled, no movement is defined.
Zero point: X = 0, Y = 0, Z = 0.
The joblist NC system is placed in the middle of the table in the machine model used in the
simulation.
3. The C lamping position option is enabled and a movement is defined.
Zero point: X = -100, Y = -100, Z = -218.
The job list N C system is placed according to the defined movement against the table upper edge
middle reference point of the machine model used in the simulation.
If subsequent changes are made to the clamping position, update the jobs in the job
list using the U pdate clamping position function (job list's shortcut menu). It is not
necessary to recalculate the jobs.
Frame limit dialogue page
The F rame limit dialogue page is only available via the D efine frame dialogue in the job list (dialogue page
Setup →N CS.
Using the frame limit, jobs with hole features may be automatically assigned to a job list ( A pply macro
function). Assignment is based on the direction of the hole features used in the job that may either be
defined using an angle limit from A/B and C axes or using plane normals.
hyperMILL
45

Frame limit
None: The hole features may be in all directions.
Limit 3D range: Specify the permissible maximum angle range of the A/B and C axes. Here, the A/B axes
correspond to the X/Y direction and the C axis corresponds to the Z direction of the selected coordinate
system.
Limit by planes: Use the normals of the selected planes as limits. A graphical preview (1) shows the
defined frame limit. The following applies to the Limit 3D range option:
Yellow: All jobs with a hole feature direction within the area marked in yellow will be merged into the
corresponding joblist.
Green: All jobs with a hole feature direction within the area marked in green will be merged into an
additionally created joblist.
1
The following example describes application of the F rame limit function.
Application
All holes with directions within the defined angle limit are to be merged into a single job list.
Procedure
1. Create the corresponding joblists and define the F rame limit necessary for the respective N C
system by specifying a permissible maximum angle range for the rotation axes (see description
above).
2. Use the F eature Mapping function. Enable the U se Generic Hole Only function to do so. hy-
perMILL creates a list of G eneric Holes which correspond to the defined mapping conditions.
3. Then select all G eneric Holes with the same diameter and select the A pply macro function from
the shortcut menu.
4. In the macro database, select the job list with the required frame limit, enable the C heck frame
option and click A pply.
Result
All jobs whose feature orientation lies within the defined maximum angle range will be included in the
selected joblist.
A new joblist will be created for all jobs whose feature orientation lies outside the defined frame limit.
Zero point
Influence your NC output by defining zero points.
hyperMILL
46
Make accuracy or tolerance corrections for a specific area of the part to be machined as well as precise
position adjustments.
Each zero point is identified by a unique ID. The ID is translated into NC instructions during postprocessing
using an origin table.
For more information on this, please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Define origin
1. In the job list, J ob list settings dialogue page, enable the A llow multiple origins option.
2. In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the F rames dialogue page and select the N ew origin option
from the shortcut menu. Specify the R eference system and Origin.
3. On the G eneral dialogue page, set the N ame and ID. Save your entries.
The new origin appears as an entry in the frame browser. If this origin is assigned to a job as an active
origin, it will be displayed in the Job dialogue (T ransformation dialogue page).
Use the M ax. number of origins function (h yperMILL settings →D ocument) to define the maximum permit-
ted number of origins.
Assign an origin to a job
1. In the Job definition, switch to the T ransformation dialogue page.
2. Select the required origin from the list under O utput origin or click the icon (1) to define a new
origin. Click the icon (2) to modify an origin.
The active O utput origin is displayed as graphical feedback in the CAD window.
Example of use
Contour Milling on 3D Model- Transformations
To machine a contour on four different sides of a cube in a job, for example, you just have to program this
on one side. The other three sides of the cube are machined automatically by transformation. To do this in
the job definition, proceed as follows:
1. Create an o rigin for each side to be machined. Then create a frame for each origin using the N ew
frame from origin shortcut menu.
2. Make the required settings in each of the job dialogues. Make sure that the correct frame (defined
for the contour) is set in the T ool →F rame area. Then switch to the T ransformation dialogue
page.
3. Define a G eneral pattern where you specify each of the previously defined (origin-based) frames
as the t arget reference system. Switch to the T ransformation dialogue page of the job definition,
set the transformation to A ctive, disable the K eep original job option and select the U se job frame
option under S tart reference.
In the calculation that follows, hyperMILL transforms the contour defined on the one side of the cube to
three other sides of the cube and therefore allows complete machining of all sides of the cube in a single
job.
Please note, that you need a special licence to use this function. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
hyperMILL
47

Associative Workplane
An associative workplane is linked in hyperCAD-S with the entities, selected for creation. Modifications
to the entities are carried over to the linked workplane. To use an associative workplane in hyperMILL,
proceed as follows:
1. A ctivate Parametric Modelling in hyperCAD-S,
2. select the desired F rame or Origin in hyperMILL,
3. activate the A ssociative workplane function on the dialog page D efinition and select the desired
workplane.
An associative workplane is marked with a lock symbol in the hyperMILL browser.
NC output
NCS and frame lie in one plane
Using hyperMILL, it is possible to generate an NC output in these situations without switching workplanes
even when using indexing postprocessors.
All toolpath points (coordinates) refer to the active origin/NCS. In addition, the Z axes of the NCS and the
job frame must have the same direction.
If you would like to have this type of NC output, please contact your OPEN MIND partner, who will be glad
to assist you in enabling this new output.
Switch workplanes for transformations in the plane
Using hyperMILL, it is possible to force jobs with transformations to switch to a different workplane for each
job created by a transformation if all these transformations are in the same plane as the job frame.
If the job frame and NCS are in the same plane and an NC output was already enabled for the NCS, then
this option is not available. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner to arrange this.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Coordinate systems
New frame: Create a new frame.
New origin: Create a new origin.
New origin from frame: Create a new origin based on the current frame.
Edit...: Edit the selected coordinate system.
Copy, Cut, Paste, Delete: Entries are managed in the standard Windows manner.
Set workplane: Set the workplane to the current frame/origin.
Set turn workplane: Set the workplane for turning jobs to the current frame/origin.
Generate graphical entities: Generate non-associative CAD elements for the display of the coordinate
system (for example, for 2D drafting). If the frame is changed, the elements must be deleted manually and
re-generated.
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Usage: Display jobs in which the selected element is used.
hyperMILL setup: Open the dialogue for inputting the basic settings of hyperMILL.
Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn feedback on/off for the currently selected coordinate system.
hyperMILL
48
Tool management
An external database and a document database are available for managing tools. Tools stored in the
external database are called external tools. Tools stored in the document database are called document
tools.
External tool
Standard tools for manufacturing tasks are stored in the external OPEN MIND tool database with all data
specific to them, such as tool number, machining type and so on. While defining tools in the CAM program-
ming, you can access the external OPEN MIND tool database at any time to import the appropriate tools
into the current document.
The external OPEN MIND tool database is displayed in the h yperMILL settings dialogue, D atabase dia-
logue page.
Transfer NC tool from database to hyperMILL
Select an NC tool from the OPEN MIND tool database:
1. Go to the J obs or Tools dialogue page of the hyperMILL browser and click the
 icon to open the
Select NC-Tools dialogue.
2. Switch to the N C Tools dialogue page and select the required tool. If changes are made to tool
parameters before transfer to hyperMILL, click the
 icon to confirm the changes.
3. To transfer the tool to hyperMILL, use the T ransfer to hyperMILL function on the shortcut menu.
Select icons in the NC Tools dialogue:
Save modified tool data.
Discard modified tool data (do not save).
Specify settings for the R eport.
Edit cutter materials
Edit materials
Edit couplings
Edit technology usages
Edit coolants
Edit formulas
Edit user-defined data classes.
Document tool
If the external database does not contain a tool you need, you can set it up as a new document tool in
the current document (model file). Document tools are stored in list form on the T ools dialogue page of the
hyperMILL browser in the M illing tools, Drilling tools and Turning tools sections.
Right-click the Tools dialogue page to show all available tabs of the hyperMILL browser. Enable the
desired view options.
hyperMILL
49

Icons in the tool browser:
Hide tools (milling, drilling, turning tools) as a list in the browser.
Show tools (milling, drilling, turning tools) as a list in the browser.
(Local) document tool
Tool is linked to external database and updated.
Tool is linked to external database. Update needed.
Broken link to external tool database.
This tool carries a warning.
Select NC tool from external tools database.
All tools are identified by a unique ID. Make sure that you assign a unique ID to each
new NC tool you define.
Define tool
1. Switch to the T ools tab.
2. Choose N ew →[ Tool type] from the shortcut menu.
3. Define all required parameters in the E dit [tool type] input dialogue. Make sure that the tool has a
unique ID ( G eneral section).
4. Close the dialogue box when all entries are made.
A click in the rows S pindle, H older, E xtension or T ool enables functions for selecting and editing the
components.
The tool appears in the list of document tools and can be selected during job definition.
You can edit and save document tools in the document, even if you have not defined a (valid) external
database.
Edit icons in the Tool type dialogue
Export NC tool, tool, spindle or holder to external tool database.
Edit tool.
hyperMILL
50
Specify the geometry for the components (Spindle, Holder, Extension) in the CAD system
using the Contour selection function.
Select spindle or holder from external tools database.
Select tool holder from external tools database.
Select tool from external tools database.
Select extension from external tools database.
Insert extension from external tools database.
Define holder or extension in hyperMILL TOOL Builder.
Edit the geometry for a component (spindle, holder, extension) in the geometry editor.
Remove component from assembly.
Unlink the tool from the external tools database.
Relink the tool to the external tools database.
Update tool status.
Show difference between the local tool and the tool in the external tools database.
Update tool with data from the external tools database.
Edit coolants
hyperMILL
51

Define turning tool
To define a turning tool:
1. On the T ools tab, in the lower area ( T urning tools), click with the right mouse button.
2. Choose N ew →[ Tool type] from the shortcut menu.
3. In the N ew turning tool dialogue:
Select an I nsert from the external tool database or define a new one.
Select a T ool holder from the external tool database or define a new one.
4. Specify the tool parameters T ool angle, T ool reference and C utting edge position by selecting the
parameter set.
5. Define all required parameters in the E dit turning tool dialogue. Make sure that the tool has a
unique ID ( General section).
Close the dialogue box when all entries are made. The tool appears in the list of Document tools and can
be selected during job definition.
If, in the NC file, the position of the cutting edge and location are to be output, the
postprocessor must be adjusted. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Define tool in a job
1. Switch to the J obs tab.
2. Create the required job and switch to the T ools dialogue page.
3. Select the tool type (1) and a defined tool (2).
Cutting profile
The parameters of the cutting profile are defined in the external tool database on the T echnology dialogue
page.
All numerical cutting values of the cutting profile are linked by default to the technology data of the tool via
the factor value 1.
Usage: If no cutting profiles are stored for the material selected in the job list for the tool, the I nvariant
cutting profile is used.
If the same material as in the job list is defined and multiple usages are defined, then these may be
selected in the Cutting profile.
Use formula: If technology parameters are defined for document tools via Formula, both the formula and
the relevant parameter value are displayed and saved.
hyperMILL
52
Meaning of the icons
(1) The value in the cutting profile corresponds to the value in the technology data of the tool. The value
can be changed with a factor. To do so, select the field and enter the required factor.
(2) The value in the cutting profile is adjusted by a factor.
(3) The value in the cutting profile has been adjusted and is no longer linked to the technology data of the
tool. Place the mouse pointer over the changed value to display the value of the technology data.
(4) The value in the cutting profile has exceeded the limit defined in the technology data and was automati-
cally reset to the limit.
(5) Click the button to remove the link between the value in the cutting profile and the technology data
value. The cutting profile value can now be adjusted as required without changing the value in the
technology data and vice versa.
(6) Click the button to restore the link between the cutting profile and technology data. The value in the
cutting profile is then overwritten again by the value in the technology data.
Location
For turning tools with N ame, select the desired location. A location comprises a set of the following
parameters: tool angle, tool reference, position of cutting edge and reference angle.
Tool reference
Enable: Select the checkbox and select a defined reference point under N ame. Applies only to T-slot
cutters, for which two reference points (Tip and Disc top) are available by default.
Tool reference: The reference point defined in the tool dialogue will be displayed, but cannot be edited.
Consider corner radius: Function not enabled (1). The infeed distance is based on the total tool diameter.
When working with bullnose endmills, material ridges may remain. Function enabled (2): The infeed
distance is based on the tool's inner shank (shank diameter – 2x corner radius). Material ridges are
avoided.
1 2
hyperMILL
53

The following applies to tools in the 3 D Automatic Rest Machining cycle:
Reference
The reference tool is used for the calculation of the rest material areas.
Type: Type of reference tool may be different from type of machining tool. When the Rest material
reference cycle option is enabled, the previously unmachined rest material area is selected as the area to
be machined.
Diameter: A requirement is: Reference tool > machining tool.
If you select bullnose end mill as a reference tool type, machining is only possible in
entire part mode!
Frame
Free angle: Defines the minimum angle to be maintained between the tool insert and the calculated
toolpath (1). Defining a free angle automatically calculates the tool plunge angle. (2) Turning contour, (3)
Turning model.
1
2
3
Free geometry
Use free tip geometry for collision check: Enable if the free tip geometry (1) and not the parametric tip
geometry (2) should be used to calculate the toolpath, for collision checking and simulation.
Example (A) Function not enabled, the tool geometry is in collision with the model geometry.
(B) Function enabled, no toolpath generated due to collision of the model geometry
with the tool geometry.
hyperMILL
54
The U se free tip geometry for collision check function is currently available for the
following cycles: Contour Milling on 3D Model, T-Slot Milling on 3D Model, Playback
Milling, Plunge Milling.
Use free tip geometry for calculation: Enable to use the freely defined tool tip for toolpath calculation and
simulation.
Example 3 D Profile Finishing cycle
(1) Function not enabled (distance tool–model = 0.1).
(2) Function enabled (distance tool–model = 0.0).
0.1
0.0
0.1
1
2
hyperMILL
55

The U se free tip geometry for calculation function is currently available for the following
cycles: 3D Profile Finishing, 3D Z Level Shape Finishing, 3D Optimised Roughing, 5X
Rework Machining, 5X Swarf Cutting one Curve, 5X Tangent Machining.
The U se free tip geometry for calculation option cannot be used in combination with the
High precision surface mode function (Settings dialog page).
Icons in the Tools dialogue
Select NC tool from external tools database.
Create a new document tool
Edit a document tool
Enable 3D view for the tool
Show freely defined tool geometry
Define frame
Change frame
Limit spindle speed.
Define technology parameters using a formula
Import tool from database
In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the T ools / J obs tab or go to the T ool dialogue page in the job
definition.
Select NC tool from external tools database.
Select the tool you require in the browser of the external OPEN MIND tool database. If you hold down the
left mouse button and the C TRL key simultaneously, you can select more than one tool at once.
In the NC tool view of the external tool database, all input fields not directly belonging to the NC tool are
write-protected.
If necessary, use a filter to restrict the display of the tools. For this purpose, define the appropriate filter
conditions in the areas G eneral, T ool, H older and T echnology. Right-click the mouse, select Transfer to
hyper MILL from the shortcut menu and close the dialogue box.
hyperMILL
56
The N C tool is displayed in the list of document tools and is linked to the external OPEN MIND tool
database. When importing a tool via the hyperMILL browser, new tools can be created in the import dia-
logue. This is not possible when importing via the job definition. When importing a tool via the job definition
and when opening the import dialogue successively, the tool previously defined is already pre-selected.
If, based on a unique ID, hyperMILL I D) recognises that this tool has already been imported, you will be
prompted whether you want to update the tool in question.
Export tool to tool database
In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the T ools tab, highlight the tool and choose E xport to tool database
from the shortcut menu. If the I D of the tool already exists in the external database, a dialogue box
( C onstraint Violation) is shown; here, the ID highlighted in red must be corrected. The tool will be then set
up again in the external database. If the tool contains components that are already present in the external
database, these are not created again. The system checks whether an exact match of the parameters
exists. If no exact match exists, the differences will be displayed in a dialogue box.
A password is requested when exporting to a password-protected database. The database remains pass-
word- protected after a successful export. For a re-export you need to re-enter the password.
Remove link to database
In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the T ools tab and highlight tool(s).
Unlink/ U nlink all tools: shortcut menu function. Unlinks the link to the external database. Any subsequent
changes to the tool definition will only be stored in the document database. As an alternative to the
shortcut menu: Double-click the tool, click S tatus >
 in the tool dialogue.
Restore link to database
In the case of an external tool in the tool browser that has been unlinked from the current document
(shortcut menu function U nlink / Unlink all tools), the link to the external database can be recovered
(shortcut menu function R elink).
No data is transferred from the external database. Use the shortcut menu function u pdate tool/all tools for
this.
Relink all tools: Relinks all unlinked tools listed in the tool browser to the external database.
Edit tool
In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the T ools tab. Open the tool dialogue by double-clicking the list entry
or via the E dit shortcut menu.
Document tool External tool
Make the desired changes in the G eometry /
Technology fields.
Click G eneral > to update tool in the
external database.
Components ( S pindle, H older, E xtension) are
always added by means of importing from the
external database.
Make the desired changes in the G eometry/
Technology fields. The changes apply to both
the tool saved in the document, as well as to the
tool linked to the external database.
Tool status
 Tool status
Edit external tool in document
Click Status to remove link to external NC tool. Make the desired changes in the G eometry/Technology
fields. The changes apply only to the tool stored in the document.
Update external tool
In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the T ools tab and highlight tool(s).
hyperMILL
57

Update state / U pdate all states: Function on the shortcut menu that updates the status of the linked tool.
This process also checks whether the linked tool is still in the external database and if the tool definition is
up to date. No changes are made to the tool definition.
Tool / U pdate all tools: Function on the shortcut menu that updates the linked tool with data from the
external tool database. As part of this process, the data of the linked tool is changed if necessary to make
it match the tool in the external database. The status of the linked tool is then updated.
The selection of a different tool type can cause problems with reference jobs. For this
reason, the basic type of an NC tool cannot be subsequently modified.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Tools
New: Create a new tool.
Edit: Edit the selected tool.
Copy / Paste: Copy the selected tool and paste to another document. If the N C number or ID already
exists, it is automatically incremented by 1.
Delete: Delete the selected tool from the current document. If there is a link to an external database, the
linked tool will not be deleted from the external database.
Update state / Update all states: Update the status of the selected tool or all tools of the document.
Tool / Update all tools: Update the selected tool or all tools with the data from the tool database.
Update technology: Update the selected tool with technology data from the tool database. The following
are updated: technology records, cutting profiles, cutter material, spindle direction and cutting edges.
Unlink / Unlink all tools: Unlink the selected tool or all tools of the document from the external database.
Relink/ Relink all tools: Link the selected tool or all tools of the document with the database.
Difference: Show the differences between local and (external) database tool. The differences are highligh-
ted in colour. Use the two buttons p revious and next to navigate between the differences.
Export to tool database: export selected tools to external database.
Load from file: import tools from a text file in *.tst or *.xml format in the current hyperMILL document.
Export ... / Export all...: Export the selected tools or all tools of a document to an*.XMLfile.
Messages ...: Display of warning(s) stored for the tool. This is also displayed as a tooltip in the S tatus
column of the tool list.
Usage...: Display of J ob ID and Job name. Open the job definition with a double-click.
hyperMILL automatically calculates the matching tool length once the test tool option
and the options to reduce/extend the tool are enabled (see S etup dialogue page). The
calculated tool length is displayed in the dialogue box u sage.
hyper MILL Setup..: Open the hyperMILL settings dialogue.
Feedbacks/No feedbacks: Show/hide the tool feedback.
Feedback position: Set the base point for the feedback in the CAD model.
hyperMILL
58
Import tool from .XML file
Importing data via drag-and-drop: You can easily import tool and technology data using
drag-and-drop. Simply drag the.xmlfile from the file explorer to the Tools tab in the
hyperMILL browser. This function is available for all tool data that was previously expor-
ted from the tool database in hyperMILL.xmlformat, as well as for tool manufacturer
data that can be saved in hyperMILL.xmlformat.
Additional functions
Define the display accuracy: Set the display accuracy for numerical values on the T ools tab of the
hyperMILL browser. Open the external tool database and select the A ccuracy entry from the shortcut
menu. The display accuracy applies to document tools and external tools.
hyperMILL
59

Prepare manufacturing geometry
Both 2D contours and CAD models can be used for 2D machining.
3D, 5-axis and turning jobs are based on a CAD model.
A stock model can be defined for various machining operations.
2D machining
You can select the following contours:
• Lines, circles, polylines, splines, graphics loaded in*.omxformat (Contour Milling, Pocket Milling
and Helical Drilling).
• Points (drill positions)
Generate contours from toolpaths: Curves extracted from previously calculated toolpaths can be used both
as 2D contours and as help contours for 3D or 5-axis machining. For information on selecting contours,
see section Selecting elements in the CAD system (page 26) .
3D and 5-axis machining
3D and 5-axis machining are based on a CAD model. This contains:
The CAD model
The basis for the creation of an NC program for 3D machining is the CAD model created in the CAD
program and consisting of surfaces and/or solids. It contains all areas to be machined, as well as adjacent
areas that are not to be machined in order to optimize the machining procedure and the collision check. 2D
or 3D lines that are used as limitation contours or leading curves for profiles during the job definition.
Surface gaps
Make sure that no gaps arise between adjacent surfaces or between adjacent surfaces and solids during
model creation. Large surface gaps can cause unwanted nose-diving of the cutter in the course of machin-
ing. Gaps with a size below the used cutter radius are not critical.
Overlapping surfaces
Overlapping surfaces can result in unwanted rest material areas. These areas cannot be removed by Auto-
matic rest material recognition, as they are not the result of too large cutter diameters but of intersecting
surfaces.
In the course of, and after creating machining cycles, the CAD model must neither be moved nor changed
in its position in space.
Stock
A stock model in*.stl(Stereo Lithography) or*.vis(Visicut) format can be defined for various ma-
chining operations. Stock models in the format*.visare recommended if you require greater accuracy
and want to use the stock models that are generated in further stock model calculations (= stock model
update).
hyperMILL
60
If a stock model in*.stlformat is used for a stock model update, it has to be a closed
solid.
By default, stock models with a file size of up to 200 MB are displayed in hyperMILL.
If the stock file is larger, this is indicated in the browser by the following icon:
 .
The size limit can be adjusted to suit individual requirements in the dialogue S etup →
hyperCAD-S document →S TL file display.
Collision check
The updated stock model is checked for collisions. This guarantees that both tracked and calculated stock
models are always collision-checked.
Define stock model
1. In the hyperMILL browser, go to theJ obs tab and double-click to open the required job list. On the
Models dialogue page, select the D efined option and select a stock model.
2.
 Click the icon to define a new stock model or
3.
 click the icon to modify an existing stock model.
Alternatively, open the dialogue via the J ob definition on the Setup dialogue page or using the N ew stock
shortcut menu in the lower area of the hyperMILL browser on the M odels dialogue page.
The Stock model dialogue
General
Name/Comment: You only need to specify a name if the stock model is to be generated by e xtrusion or
rotation. A descriptive comment can help you identify the stock model later.
Mode
In general, the following options are provided for generating stockmodels: Extrusion, Rotation, Surfaces,
From job, File, Bounding geometry, From job chain.
Extrusion: Define a (closed) stockmodel based on a contour and a (positive/negative) offset. It can be used
for a stock model calculation and for a stock model update.
Extrusion
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
hyperMILL
61

Profile: Select contour.
Offset 1 / Offset 2: Specify the height of the stock model in the Z direction (+/-).
Mode
Rotation: Define a (closed) stock model based on an (open) contour between the start and end point by
means of the rotation axis. It can be used for a stock model calculation and for a stock model update.
Rotation
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
Profile: Select an open contour.
Resolution: Define the fineness of the curve resolution.
Mode
Surfaces: Define a stockmodel based on any selectable surfaces from a CAD model. The stockmodel
cannot be used for a stockmodel update because it is not closed.
Surfaces
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
Surfaces: Select surfaces manually.
hyperMILL
62
Define surfaces with the help of the geometry filter.
Close stockmodel
Close stock and generate a reference of a VIS file
Following the surface selection, click the icon to use the stock for a stock model update. The stock
model is closed and a corresponding VIS file is created. This function is also available in file mode.
Select Mode →F ile and select the*.stlfile that should be converted to*.visformat.
Automatic: A closed stock is created based on the selected surfaces. The stock remains closed
even if the geometry is moved. The stock information is contained in the*.hmcfile. It is not
necessary to manually convert the geometry data (*.vis format).
Mode
From Job: Define a stock model based on the closed stock model of a reference job (stock model update).
Reference job
Select reference job: Click the icon to select a reference job. The description of the selected reference
job is used as the stockmodel name.
Select mm or inch to specify the system of units.
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
Mode
File: Select any file in*.STLor*.VISformat. The description of the selected file is used as the stock
model name.
If the file selected here is to be used for a stockmodel calculation, it has to be a closed solid.
The following applies to STL files that have been created using the Geometric Engine or hyperCAD: If the
file is to be used to define a stock model, set the workplane to WKS before saving the file ( W orkplane →
Set to world).
Mode
Bounding geometry: Define a stockmodel based on an existing CAD model. You can use either the profile
of the CAD model, a box or cylinder as the basis for creating a stock model.
hyperMILL
63

Bounding geometry
Profile: The p rofile of the active CAD model will be used as the bounding geometry. In this case, existing
surfaces are rotated around the Z axis of the selected frame. You can define an o ffset (optional).
Box/Cylinder: A box/cylinder that is based on the outer boundary of the loaded model is created. Double-
click the A llowance line to specify a freely definable offset.
In cubical stock models, the offset can be defined for the frame direction (+/-) X, Y and Z. In cylindrical
stock models, the offset can be defined for the top, bottom and shell. When you define a cylindrical stock
model, you can also specify the outer diameter and stock height.
Global offset: Select this option if the offset is to apply to the entire stockmodel.
Cast offset: Create a cast stock model based on the current CAD model.
Surfaces: Click the icon to select the s urfaces or solid to be used as the basis for creating the cast stock
model. If required, define an o ffset.
Select frame: When creating a stockmodel, the frame of the joblist or job is used by default. You can also
use another frame or define a new frame.
Calculate: Start the stockmodel calculation.
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
Once the calculation has been performed, the storage location ( P ath), measurement system ( m m/ i nch)
and R esolutionare displayed in the F ile area. You can also change these. A corresponding entry is made
in the stock browser and the cast stockmodel is available for further machining in all cycles that support
stockmodels.
Cast stock models are always created in*.visformat.
Mode
Turning: Select this option if the stock model is to be used for T urning and define the stock model
generation mode.
hyperMILL allows you to generate a stock model for turning jobs from a stock model for milling jobs and
vice versa.
Rotation: Define a (closed) p rofile and turning axis either directly in the graphics window or from a milling
stockmodel or an existing file.
Click the icon to open the G enerate turning stock from milling stock dialogue.
Options
Stock: Select a stockmodel.
hyperMILL
64
File: Select any geometry file in*.omxor*.stlformat and set the measurement system ( m m / inch).
Frame for turning axis: Select the frame for the turning axis. The Z axis of the selected frame corresponds
to the turning axis of the turning stock. Define the r esolution and an o ffset, if required.
Mode
From job: Define a stock model based on the stock model of a reference job.
Reference job
Select reference job: Click the icon to select a reference job. The description of the selected reference
job is used as the stockmodel name.
Bounding geometry: Use a bounding geometry to create a stockmodel for a turning job. You can select the
following options:
Profile: The profile of the current polyhedron is used to generate a turning stock, while taking into account
any defined offset.
Cylinder: While taking account of a defined offset, a cylindrical turning stock is created on the basis of the
current polyhedron. After the calculation, the current stock size and minimum stock size are shown in the
list display.
Pipe: While taking account of a defined offset, a pipe-shaped turning stock is created on the basis of the
current polyhedron. After the calculation, the current stock size and minimum stock size are shown in the
list display.
Global offset: Select this option if the offset is to apply to the entire stockmodel.
If not, specify the offset for the top, bottom, shell and inner shell. Define the inner shell diameter and outer
shell diameter.
1 2
3
(1) Turning stock, (2) Turning contour, (3) Turning area
Mode
From job chain: Adapt the resolution for a stockmodel from a job chain.
Parameters
Define the start stockmodel, format and resolution of the resulting stockmodel.
Start stockmodel
File: Click P ath to select any file in*.STLor*.VISformat. Use the S tock option to select an existing
stockmodel from the list as a start stockmodel.
hyperMILL
65

Resulting model
Select the S TL (Stereo Lithography) or V IS (Visicut) option to specify the format of the resulting model
and set the required resolution. Stock models in*.VISformat are recommended if you require greater
accuracy.
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
History
Display information on the creation mode and resolution of the generated stockmodel in the P arameters
and Job chain areas.
Calculate stock
Stock model calculations can be performed for job lists or individual jobs. The resulting stock model is
calculated based on the previously defined stock model. A resulting stock model can be used as the basis
for subsequent machining (stock model update).
Calculate in the job definition
On the Setup dialogue page of the job definition, define the m odel and s tock model and select the
Generate resulting stock option.
Undercut trimming: Avoidance of unnecessary empty paths in undercut areas during multi-axis stock
indexing.
Calculate in the browser
In the hyperMILL browser, select the required job list or job on the J obs tab and use the C reate →
stockmodel function on the shortcut menu.
The Stock model calculation dialogue box opens.
The Stock model calculation dialogue
Stock
File: Select a closed stock model as the base stock.
Click Path to select the required file in*.stlor*.visformat. The path and file name are displayed.
From stockmodel: Select a defined stockmodel from the list or define a new stockmodel.
Resulting model
Click Path to select the required file in*.stlor*.visformat. The path and file name are displayed.
hyperMILL
66
STL/VIS: Specify the f ile format and t olerance for the calculation. For medium accuracy, a default r esolu-
tion of 0.5 is adequate.
Create stockmodel: Select this option to generate an entry in the hyperMILL browser for the stockmodel.
Optimised stock model generation in 5X machining
The prerequisite for optimised stock model generation is that the Cutting length parameter is defined in the
tool definition of the underlying job. The following tool types are not subject to this requirement: Lollipop,
Barrel cutter, T-Slot cutter and Woodruff cutter.
The following applies to tapered and non-tapered tools: If no C utting length is defined (value is 0), then
the T ip length parameter is used. The following applies for ball mills and bullnose end mills: If the C utting
length is smaller than the C orner radius, then the C orner radius is used.
Mirror stock
Each stock mirror is based on an existing s tock and the definition of a m irror. You can either mirror
individual stock models in the stock browser or all the stock models of a job list.
Mirror individual stock model
To mirror an individual stock model:
1. Select the s tock model that you want to mirror in the stock browser and choose the M irror stock
function from the shortcut menu.
2. Specify the m irror you require or define a new m irror in the M irror stock dialogue. For information
on defining a mirror, please see the Mirror section.
The mirrored stock model is displayed in the stock browser as follows: < S tock name[ mirrored]>.
Mirroring all stock in a joblist
When you mirror a j ob list you also have the option of mirroring the related s tocks.
To mirror all s tock models in a j ob list:
1. Double-click the job list entry and switch to the M irror dialogue page.
2. Set the mirror function to A ctive and enable the C opy option for M anufacturing parameters.
3. Answer the question W ould you like stocks to be mirrored? with Yes.
Mirrored stocks are created for all s tocks used in the job list. They are displayed in the stock browser as
follows:Stock name[mirrored]>.
Stock in*.visformat, R esulting stock, C ast offset stock and C ompound stock cannot
be mirrored. S tock models resulting from m irrors (mirrored stock) are not associative. If
the original stock or the mirror plane changes, the stock models are not updated.
Combine multiple stock models
If you want to machine several components together that each have a separate stock model, you can
merge the stock models to form a C ompound stock. A component can be machined and checked against
the compound stock at the same time.
To create a c ompound stock:
1. Right-click the stock browser and select N ew compound stock.
2. Then select the required stocks in the list of available stock models and confirm your selection.
hyperMILL
67

Edit stock
The Edit stock function can be used to further process stock resulting from the preceding stock calculation.
1. Select the stock model that you want to process further and
2. select the E dit stock function from the shortcut menu.
Two functions are available in the E dit stock dialogue.
The S plit stock function splits the selected stock model into independent areas arising as the result of a
preceding machining job (see Calculate stock section). Each area is created as a new stock entry in the
stock browser (Stock[Split1].vis, Stock[Split2].vis, and so on).
The C lean stock function creates those stock areas connected with the selected milling area as a new
stock entry in the stock browser (Stock[Cleaned].vis).
Create stock chain
Use the C reate stock chain function to create a resulting stock model for any job in a sequence of
machining steps, based on the stock model of the preceding job and the toolpath of the current job. This
function is available for joblists, any jobs in a joblist, an individual job or a compound job.
Requirements: A start stockmodel must be present. All toolpaths of the jobs for which a stockmodel is to
be created must have been calculated.
Procedure:
1. In the hyperMILL browser, select the jobs for which you want to create a stock chain.
2. Select the S tock →C reate stock chain function from the shortcut menu.
hyperMILL creates a stock object in the stock browser for each of the selected jobs.
To calculate the stock models, use the S tock →C alculate (update) function on the shortcut menu.
hyperMILL calculates the stock models for each of the generated stock objects. The stock models are
indicated by a corresponding icon in the stock browser.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Models (stockmodels)
New stock / New compound stock: Generate a new (compound) stockmodel.
Mirror stock: Generate a new stockmodel by mirroring the selected stockmodel.
New stock through transformation: Generate a new stockmodel by transforming the selected stockmodel.
Edit stock: Split or clean the selected stockmodel.
Save stock file as: Save the selected stock model in*.visformat.
Rest material display: Show the rest material of the selected stockmodel.
Edit: Open the S tockmodel dialogue and edit the selected stockmodel.
Delete: Delete the selected stock model.
Calculate: Calculate the selected stock model.
Show / Hide: Display the selected stock model in the graphics window or hide.
Autoshow: Automatically display the stock when the associated job is selected in the hyperMILL
browser.
Hide all: Hide all stock models in the graphics window.
Show with hyperVIEW: Display the selected stockmodel in hyperVIEW.
hyperMILL
68
Show with hyperVIEW only: Display the selected stockmodel only in hyperVIEW.
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Usage: Display jobs in which the selected element is used.
hyperMILL Setup: Open the Setup hyperMILL dialogue with the hyperMILL basic settings.
Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn the feedback display on/off for the selected stockmodel.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Jobs (stockmodels)
Save stock file as ...: Save the current stock model in*.visformat.
Hide / Hide all: Hide the stock / all stocks.
Autoshow: Automatically display the stock when the associated job is selected.
Calculate: Calculate the selected stockmodel.
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Usage: Display jobs in which the selected entry (stockmodel, model, fixture) is used.
hyperMILL setup: Open the dialogue for inputting the basic settings of hyperMILL.
Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn the feedback on/off for the selected milling area/stockmodel.
hyperMILL
69

Structure CAM project
Structure a CAM project in the hyperMILL browser.
Job list
Uppermost administration level in the hyperMILL job browser. If projects have a simple structure, the job
list (work schedule) is usually sufficient for including all the jobs required to machine a workpiece in the
correct sequence. Several job lists can be assigned to one CAD model. A job list can be transferred to
other CAD models that have a similar machining sequence.
Compound job
Organise your job lists with compound jobs and clearly structure extensive CAM projects. Use compound
jobs to structure transformations or assign individual transformations to several jobs. In contrast to job lists,
which only permit mirrors, compound jobs also allow linear patterns and circular patterns in addition to
mirrors.
Job
Lowermost administration level in the hyperMILL job browser. A hyperMILL job is a typical machining step
within a joblist. The following machining strategies are available for defining jobs: Probing, Turning, Drilling,
2D Milling, 3D Milling, 5-axis Milling.
Linking job
Link jobs with each other in such a way that approach and retract movements for the entire machining
sequence and all linking movements between the individual jobs can be optimised and monitored for
collisions.
NC event
Structure your programming, independent of joblists and jobs, with control-specific functions and com-
mands that are forwarded directly to the postprocessor.
Job list
A job list is automatically created when you call up a machining cycle for a job definition.
In order to create another job list, in the hyperMILL browser, switch to the Jobs tab, right-click N ew →
Select job list.
Job list settings can be defined separately for each job list. You must make the settings before you
calculate the toolpaths.
To edit, double-click the joblist or select the E dit function from the shortcut menu.
Export/import job list
Save a joblist with all its parameters and settings in *.jst format and transfer to other CAD models.
Advantages: Job archiving is independent of the drawings, fast programming of frequently occurring
procedures, transfer of jobs to workpieces with the same drawing parts when machining sequence is the
same.
To export a job list:
1. Select job list and then select the E xport function from the shortcut menu.
2. Specify the required export options as well as the name and path (storage location) of the file.
Include tools / I nclude geometry / I nclude frames: Tools, geometries (boundaries, profiles) and frames are
also exported along with the machining parameters.
Include milling area references / I nclude stock references / I nclude feature references: Milling areas, stock
models and features are also exported.
To import a job list:
1. Use the N ew →L oad from file function on the browser's shortcut menu.
hyperMILL
70
2. Select the*.jstfile and enable the required import options.
The Export and Import functions are also available for the individual jobs in a job list.
Direct job transfer
Direct transfer of job lists or selected jobs to other CAD models using the C opy and P aste functions on the
shortcut menu. When pasting into a job list, select the ( I nclude tools / I nclude geometry) import options:
All tools assigned to the job or all defined geometries (boundaries, profiles) of the job are imported with the
machining parameters.
The Job list dialogue
The Job list dialogue consists of the following dialogue pages: J ob list settings, C omments, M odels,
Turning, Mirror and Postprocessor.
Job list settings
Joblist
Name: Enter the name required for the joblist.
Compound job IDs/Job IDs: Use S tart to define the start ID and Increment to define the incremental
increase of the start ID for compound jobs/jobs.
Use M in. digit count to define the minimum number of digits for numbering jobs/compound jobs in the job
list.
Toolpath
Check default path and name; change if necessary.
NCS
You must specify the program zero point before creating the toolpath. Subsequent moving of the NCS
invalidates the toolpaths previously created.
Calculation
Compensated centre path: Applies to the 2D Contour Milling, 2D Contour Milling on 3D Model and Inclined
Contouring cycles.
Origins
Allow multiple origins: Select this option if you require multiple origins for machining, in order, for example,
to machine a contour on four different sides of a cube with the help of transformations.
The Best Fit function is only available with an appropriate licence.
Best Fit
Best Fit: Activate if the P arameter →N C →B est Fit function in the 3 D Point Probing cycle is to generate a
measuring log for further processing with the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center. The measuring log
records the position values on the component that is not yet optimally aligned.
Main and counter spindle
Allow main and counter spindle: Activate to generate a job list structure for turning with main and counter
spindle. This consists of the two sub-job list elements M ainspindle and C ounterspindle as well as the
Transfer job for transferring the turning model between the main and counter spindle.
hyperMILL
71

Comments
General information on a hyperMILL project that is transferred to the NC program as an NC comment. You
can also add further information on the CAD file or CNC machine to the NC file by defining a prologue in
the hyperVIEW Machine definition dialogue.
Part data
Stock
Definition of a stock model that is available for multiple jobs in a job list.
Model
Definition of a milling area that is available for multiple jobs in a job list. The definitions are applicable for
visualising the model data in hyperVIEW.
Material
The Defined option is activated by default when you create a new job list. In the list, select the m aterial you
require for machining purposes.
If you import a tool from the OPEN MIND tool database into the job definition, and the m aterial defined in
the job list is also assigned to this tool, set the M odel option in the c utting profile under U sage in order to
use the technology parameters associated with this tool.
Clamp
Defined: Enable to assign a c lamping area to a job list or to define a new clamping area.
Resolution: Max. permissible distance (1) between the faceted surface of the polyhedron model and the
real model surface.
1
Click the icon to define a new clamping area.
Fixture mainspindle / Fixture counterspindle
Only available if a job list is generated for turning jobs, see J ob list settings dialogue page.
(A) Body length: Define the main spindle chuck housing. To do this, select two points. P ick fixture body
clampingposition (1) as the first point. P ick fixture body front (2) as the second point.
(B) Jaw length: Define the main spindle clamping jaw. To do this, select two points. P ick fixture jaw front
(3) as the first point. P ick fixture body front (2) as the second point.
(C) Body length: Define the counter spindle chuck housing. To do this, select two points. P ick fixture
body clampingposition (4) as the first point. P ick fixture body front (5) as the second point.
hyperMILL
72
(D) Jaw length: Define the counter spindle clamping jaw. To do this, select two points. P ick fixture body
front (5) as the first point. P ick fixture jaw front (6) as the second point.
3
1
2
A B
4
5
6
D C
Part data
Define length (1) and orientation of the component (A). To do this, select two points. Select the first
point on the front of the component (2) (P ick parts front point). Select a point on the back of the component
(3) as the second point (P ick parts back point).
(A) Part, (B) Main spindle clamping jaws, (C) Main spindle housing
C
B
A
2
3
1
Z
X
hyperMILL
73

Mirror
Define a m irror for all jobs/compound jobs in the job list. To do this, select the respective checkbox in the
Active line and under S election choose the m irror you require.
Click the icon to define a new mirror.
Job list comments are transferred to a new, mirrored job list when a m irror is created.
Turning
Turning stock / Turning model
Define or select the T urning stock and T urning model. See the Stock model dialogue for further
information on defining a turning stock/turning model.
Main and counter spindle
Allow main and counter spindle: Activate to generate a job list structure for turning with main and counter
spindle. This consists of the two sub-job list elements M ainspindle and C ounterspindle as well as the
Transfer job for transferring the turning model between the main and counter spindle.
NC
The functions O rigin ID (NCS) and N C safety are available with a licence for the hy-
perMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center or the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Optimizer.
Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Origin ID (NCS)
Use global definition: Enable to use the default settings of the VIRTUAL Machining postprocessor for
creating the NC file.
Origin ID (NCS): Activate to select the origin directly from the list for different projects or setups. Time-con-
suming reconfiguration in the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center is no longer necessary.
NC safety / Postprocessor safe positions
When the P ostprocessor safe positions option is used, fixed positions in the machine coordinate system
are used to ensure NC safety.
The positions are stored in the postprocessor configuration and are approached, in particular, for safe
positioning (by moving linear and rotary axes). When approaching the positions, the NC file switches to
machine coordinates (for exampleM91for Heidenhain,SUPAfor Siemens).
hyperMILL
74
NC safety / General safety
Use different safety functions (clearance distance/clearance plane) to enable collision-free machining on
the machine.
Prefer general safety: Activate for machining operations in which collision safety must be guaranteed
regardless of the model geometry and the tools used. The function combines the following strategies:
• (A): Machining with short tool. Linking movements take place at the level of the S ecurity plane, see
General safety →S ecurity plane.
• (B): Machining with very long tool. The 2 D Curve is used to guide the tool, see N C safety - interac-
tive →2 D Curve. Linking movements take place at the L inking height, see N C safety - interactive →
Linking height.
If the P refer general safety function is activated, hyperMILL automatically decides between variants (A)
and (B), whereby (A) is generally used so long as the tool length is sufficiently short and the Z axis limits
are not violated. Otherwise, variant (B) is used.
Example BC kinematics, Contouring using 3D Free Path Milling, (1) Contours to be machined,
(2) 2D Curve for guiding the tool, (3) S ecurity plane, (4) L inking height.
hyperMILL
75

X
Y
1
2
3 4
A B
2
Axial security distance: Distance to be maintained between the tool and part in the axial direction. The
defined value is taken into account when the O ptimize clearance plane option is enabled.
Example BC kinematics, (1) Height of the clearance plane.
hyperMILL
76
B
C
1
Security plane: The height of the security plane is calculated to the given clamping position. The value
should be selected so that all rotary axes of the machine can be moved without a collision.
For table-head, head-head kinematics as well as for kinematics with more than 5 axes, the direction of the
security plane can be defined.
Example BC kinematics, (1) Height of the security plane (2) Side view, (3) Top view, B axis
rotated by 90 degrees.
C
B
1 2
3
Optimize clearance plane: When generating the NC file, the NC Optimizer trims the fast travel movements
from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane to the mandatory length. This avoids problems due to end
position violations.
hyperMILL
77

Example BC kinematics, (1) Clearance plane not optimised, X axis limit exceeded, (2) Clear-
ance plane optimised, X axis limit maintained, (3) Linking movement.
X
B
C
1 1
2
3
2
Smooth linking: Optionally, the link rapids, including connections with alternating inclination, are made
using a natural movement that is adapted to the machine kinematics. The optimisation of the hyperMILL
job clearance planes is automatically activated during smooth linking.
NC safety - interactive
Use manually generated 2D or 5X curves to enable collision-free machining on the machine.
The functions for N C safety - interactive are available with an appropriate licence for the
hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center or the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Optimiz-
er. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Active: Activate the functions for interactive safety.
2D Curve
Profiles: Select the 2D curves that can be used to generate a collision-free linking movement between
two partial machining operations.
Linking height: Define the height of the linking movement, starting from the clamping position.
Example BC kinematics: Machine with strongly limited Z axis (large component, long tool).
5X Curve
Profiles: Select the 5X curves that can be used to generate a collision-free linking movement between
two partial machining operations.
hyperMILL
78
Synchronization lines: Select synchronisation lines to adjust the tool inclination for collision-free movement.
NC safety / Optimised tunnel logic
The O ptimized tunnel logic function is specially developed for machines with two rotary
axes in the table and the possibility of collision-safe positioning of the tool and spindle
by retreating into a tunnel with the Z axis. When approaching and retracting for NC jobs,
all axes except Z are positioned in a rapid traverse block, which significantly reduces
non-productive times.
Axial security distance: Distance to be maintained for the tool in the axial direction
If the O ptimize clearance plane and S mooth linking functions are not activated, the defined axial security
distance is maintained to the highest point of the initial stock model of the job list, to the part and to the
fixture during linking movements between the jobs without a change of inclination.
When changing the inclination, a maximum retraction to tunnel position takes place in the direction of the
tool axis.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
Optimize clearance plane: If the O ptimize clearance plane function is activated, the defined axial security
distance is maintained to the highest point of the initial stock model of the job list, to the part and to the
fixture during linking movements between the jobs without a change of inclination.
When changing the inclination, the axial security distance to the initial stock model of the job list, to the part
and to the fixture is maintained.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
Smooth linking: Optionally, the link rapids, including connections with alternating inclination, are made
using a natural movement that is adapted to the machine kinematics. The optimisation of the hyperMILL
job clearance planes is automatically activated during smooth linking.
If the S mooth linking function is activated, the axial security distance is maintained to the component and
to the fixture for all linking movements between the jobs.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
hyperMILL
79

NC safety / Optimised table table logic
The O ptimized table table logic function is available for all machines with two rotary
axes in the table.
Example of use: Smooth linking and Optimize clearance plane are enabled.
Axial security distance: Distance to be maintained for the tool in the axial direction
If the O ptimize clearance plane and S mooth linking functions are not activated, the defined axial security
distance is maintained to the highest point of the initial stock model of the job list, to the part and to the
fixture during linking movements between the jobs without a change of inclination.
When changing the inclination, a maximum retraction (minus the T ool length tolerance →U pper tolerance)
takes place in the direction of the tool axis.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
hyperMILL
80
Optimize clearance plane: If the O ptimize clearance plane function is activated, the defined axial security
distance is maintained to the highest point of the initial stock model of the job list, to the part and to the
fixture during linking movements between the jobs without a change of inclination.
When changing the inclination, the axial security distance to the initial stock model of the job list, to the part
and to the fixture is maintained.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
hyperMILL
81

Smooth linking: Optionally, the link rapids, including connections with alternating inclination, are made
using a natural movement that is adapted to the machine kinematics. The optimisation of the hyperMILL
job clearance planes is automatically activated during smooth linking.
If the S mooth linking function is activated, the axial security distance is maintained to the component and
to the fixture for all linking movements between the jobs.
Fast travel movements from and to the hyperMILL job clearance plane are automatically adjusted.
hyperMILL
82
Postprocessor
Settings for machine definition and machine administration and to create NC files in hyperMILL.
NC files
Machine: enable.
Click the icon to select or specify a new machine.
NC directory: Select this option to adapt the NC directory for saving the generated NC programs to the
project directory. The path is displayed and cannot be changed.
hyperMILL
83

Use document settings: Enabled by default if NC directory is selected. The document settings apply to the
NC directory for saving the generated NC programs (Setup hyperMILL, dialogue page Document, Global
Working Space).
Disable the option to define the path for the NC directory by clicking the icon.
NC file names: Enable and select the method for naming the NC files (Single mode/Package mode).
Single mode: Creates an NC file for each job in the job list. If this option is not selected, the settings from
the machine definition will be used.
The following variables are available to define the file name:
<JLIST> Job list name.
<JOB> Job name.
<JOBID> Job ID.
<COUNTER> Position of the job in the hyperVIEW job list.
Jobs and compound jobs, which should not be postprocessed, are disregarded when determining the
value of<COUNTER>. This applies to jobs for which the G enerate NC file option on the G eneral dialogue
page is disabled or for compound jobs that have no jobs for NC generation. Jobs for which the option
create NC file is disabled, are not included in the hyperVIEW simulation.
Rule for filename generation: As standard, the file name of the NC file is composed of the following
elements:Jobname_Job ID.
Increment to job ID: This value is added to the job ID.
Package mode: All NC data for the selected joblist is written to a file. The name of the job list is used as
the file prefix.
Start of Counter: Counters that the programme can output for NC file names. The NC file names created in
single mode are numbered consecutively.
Compound job as single job: Only available in single mode. If the function is enabled, all jobs in a
compound job will be written to a single NC file. The name of the compound job is used for the <JOB>
placeholder in the NC file.
Vector fine interpolation: Enabled by default. The definition of a maximum permissible angle change
makes it possible for vector fine interpolation to control machine movements in the case of vector changes.
If you enable the function, hyperMILL will insert intermediate points into the toolpath in order to avoid any
diverging interpolation of the machine from the calculated toolpath.
(1) Vector fine interpolation disabled. (2) V ector fine interpolation enabled with a M ax. angle of 5.
1 2
hyperMILL
84
OPEN MIND recommends always enabling this function, in particular, however, for
machines without great circle interpolation.
5X Rapid mode
Default: 5X rapid tool movements occur as defined in the cycle.
Optimised: Select this option to avoid a possible pole pass and high acceleration of the C axis for 5X
machining fast travel movements. This is made possible by simultaneous 5-axis rotary movements (conical
interpolation). On the whole, the movements of the machine are softer, faster and more predictable.
Main spindle / counter spindle
Define the C oordinate system and the C lamping setup for turning with main and counter spindle.
Main spindle / counter spindle
Define a N ame and, if necessary, a C omment to uniquely describe the main spindle / counter spindle.
LCS
Define a local coordinate system (LCS) or select a previously defined zero point to determine the
position of the main spindle / counter spindle.
The alignment of the zero points must correspond to that of the selected machine.
Clamping setup main spindle
Reach: (1) Define the tool reach of the component on the main spindle. To do this, select two points.
Select jaw front (2) as the first point. Select a point on the surface of the front side of the part (3) as the
second point (P ick parts front point).
Clamping position Z: (4) Define the clamping position of the part in the Z direction. To do this, select the
contact point,that is the point on the contact surface of the spindle on the machine (5) (S elect contact
point).
A) Component, (B) Main spindle clamping jaws, (C) Main spindle housing
hyperMILL
85

C
B
A
3
2
1
4
Z
X
5
Clamping setup counter spindle
Stickin length: (1) Define the clamping depth of the component on the counter spindle. To do this, select
two points.
Select jaw front (2) as the first point. Select a point on the surface of the front side of the part (3) as the
second point (P ick parts front point).
Clamping position Z: (4) Define the clamping position of the part in the Z direction. To do this, select the
contact point, that is the point on the contact surface of the spindle on the machine (6) (S elect contact
point).
A) Component, (B) Counter spindle clamping jaws, (C) Counter spindle housing
hyperMILL
86
A
B
C
5
2
1
6
4
Z
X
3
Turningjobs frame
A standard frame for turning operations is created and displayed here when creating a C ounterspindle
subjob list.
Click the icon to edit the frame. It is not possible to select another frame here. If this is required, in the
job definition, go to the T ool dialogue page and select the appropriate frame in the F rame area.
Transfer
Program the transfer of the turning model for machining operations with main and counter spindle.
Transfer strategy
With parting: Enable to allow P arting of a long component during transfer from the main spindle to the
counter spindle. Control the parting process on the following dialogue pages. The parameters are only
available if the W ith parting function is activated.
Cleanup tool Activate to program the cleaning up of the tool.
Transfer parameter
Transferdirection UseMain to counterspindle (1) or C ounter to mainspindle (2) to set the transfer direction
of the component.
hyperMILL
87

1
2
Spindle rotation: Programming can take place without spindle rotation (option: N one) or with spindle
rotation (options: C lockwise (1) / C ounterclockwise (2).
1 2
Spindle speed: Set the spindle speed for the transfer with a rotating spindle.
Angle offset: (1) To be used for shorter parts (A) or for parts where, due to their shape, the same angular
position of both clamping jaws is not possible during transfer. The angle offset rotates the clamping jaws
(B) of the spindle that holds the part (C) by the defined value and so ensures that the part is transferred
safely.
hyperMILL
88
1
C
A
B
Transferposition: (1) Select a point on the Z axis of the local coordinate system (LCS) to set a safe transfer
position. The value corresponds to the distance of the selected point to the origin of the local coordinate
system (LCS) of the main spindle.
Feed rate reduction: (2) Select a point on the Z axis of the local coordinate system (LCS) from which the
counter spindle moves at reduced feedrate to the transfer position.
Reduced feed rate: Define the reduced feedrate for the movement of the counter spindle up to the transfer
position.
X
Z
1
G1 G0
2
hyperMILL
89

Safety
Toolsafety position: (1) Define a safety position (= parking position) for the tool during the transfer of the
part. The values displayed for Z and X define the distance to the origin of the local coordinate system
(LCS) in the Z and X directions.
1
Z
X
Optional parameters
Chuck washing Activate to optionally clean the chuck.
Fixed stop: Do not activate (1) to move the machine to a fixed transfer position. Activate (2) to move to
defined contact pressure before closing the spindle for a given part geometry.
(1) Function is not enabled, (2) Function is enabled.
hyperMILL
90
1
2
Working position counter spindle: Use A utomatic (1) to move the counter spindle to a position with maxi-
mum distance to the main spindle. Use M anual (2) to move the counter spindle to the manually defined
value. The component is then machined in the counter spindle.
hyperMILL
91

1
2
Define job
A job (machining step) contains different dialogue pages, depending on the strategy in use. The following
table provides an overview of the dialogue pages.
Overview (only associa-
tive job copy)
Summary of parameters where the parameters of the associative job
copy differ from those of the original job.
Tool Define a new tool for machining or select a tool from the tool database.
Contours Define the contours, top, bottom, start and end points for machining (2D
Milling) and specify the drill positions (Drilling).
Optimisation (only drill-
ing)
Optimise the machining paths. Depends on the drilling strategy selected.
Strategy Assign the machining strategy.
Parameters Define the infeed values, top, bottom, clearance distance, clearance
plane and infeed mode.
Boundary Specify the horizontal limit of the machining area (if this is not defined by
a contour selection).
Macros Specify approach, retract, and (where applicable) plunge strategies
5 xes Define strategies and parameters for 5-axis machining.
hyperMILL
92
Setup Define a model for the collision check. Define a stockmodel for roughing
strategies. Specify parameters for tool checks and other NC parameters.
Feature Assign or define a new feature.
Transformation Define transformation of toolpaths for symmetrical components.
General Enter job name and comments. Job-specific settings for displaying the
tool during the computer run or the simulation.
NC Define NC text (control instructions to the machine and so on) plus free
machine parameters.
Create a new job:
1. Use the N ew function on the browser's shortcut menu.
2. Select the job you require and specify the required settings on all the dialogue pages.
3.
 Save your settings and close the job definition.
Users who are not yet familiar with the functions of the various cycles can proceed as follows to create a
new job:
1. Use the N ew... →J ob... function on the browser’s shortcut menu.
2. Select the cycle you require in the selection window.
The lower part of the window provides a short description with information on how
the respective cycle functions. On the right side of the dialogue, an image provides
information on the function.
Text in dialogues that cannot be displayed in full due to its length is displayed with three points at the end.
A tool tip appears that contains the complete text.
Transfer job parameters
You can transfer the parameters of a defined job to another job. To do this, use the C opy and P aste
functions on the shortcut menu. Parameters that cannot logically be transferred are simply ignored.
Input dialogue: General
Define job-specific details for identification and display purposes.
Job information
Define the job name.
Name, Comment: Enter a name and, if required, a comment.
If N ame and/or C omment are changed, n o recalculation of the toolpath file is required.
The changed designations are automatically transferred to the toolpath file.
hyperMILL
93

ID: The identification number is set by the system and does not change even when the job sequence is
changed. Click S et job IDs on the joblist shortcut menu to set new job ID numbers.
Generate NC file: Enabled by default. An NC file is generated for the cycle if the G enerate NC file function
is used on the shortcut menu of the job in hyperMILL or in hyperVIEW.
Use for additive: Activate if the cycle is to be used for additive manufacturing. For further information, see
the Additive Manufacturing product documentation.
Use name patterns for jobs and comments
Use any job parameters to create name patterns for naming jobs and comments. Proceed as follows:
1.
 Click the icon to open the D efine name pattern dialogue and enable the U se pattern function.
2.
 Click the icon under N ame pattern to select an entry from the Job, Frame, Tool, Machining or
Parameter areas.
Any combinations of parameters and free text are possible. The selected entries are displayed in a preview
in the P review line.
Parameter values that are used change dynamically.
Any other job parameters are available in addition to the standard available parameters.
Using a job list comment in the job
Simply go to J ob information →C omment, open the D efine name pattern dialogue and
select the required comment in the N ame pattern →J ob list option. This will directly
apply the comment from the job list to the job.
Using any job parameters in the name pattern
Proceed as follows to use any job parameters in the name pattern:
1. Select the parameter in the job definition.
2. C TRL key + right-click.
3. Use the C opy property name to clipboard function on the shortcut menu.
4. In the U se name pattern dialogue, use the P arameters →P aste property name from clipboard
function to use the parameter in the name pattern.
Click the icon to save the name pattern for this job. You can also save a name pattern as a default, see
Dialogue control functions.
Tool feedback
If the feedback display is activated, the tool, tool holder and tool head are shown by default:
• at the zero point of the WCS if the tool is defined in the browser.
• at the zero point of the selected frame if the tool is defined directly in the Job dialogue.
For checking purposes, the tool position can be relocated on a job-specific basis. To do this, switch to the
General dialogue page in the job definition input dialogue.
Base point: Right-click the icon to define the position of the tool tip.
Tool holder: If defined, the tool holder and tool head are displayed along with the tool. The tool feedback
can also be placed at any location.
hyperMILL
94
Toolpath visualisation
Use global colours: Use the global colour definitions from the Setup hyperMILL dialogue ( D ocument →
Feedbacks →C olours). Disable this option if other colours should be used for the job.
G0 / G1: Set the colours for rapid tool movements (G0) and infeed movements (G1).
Point: Define the size and colour for displaying the toolpath points.
Show NC-Path: The calculated NC path is also displayed in addition to the toolpath. The colours for rapid
tool movements (G0) and infeed movements (G1) can be defined.
The S how NC-Path function is available for the following cycles: Thread Milling, Helical
Drilling, Pocket Milling, Contour Milling, Contour Milling on 3D Model, T-Slot Milling
on 3D Model, Chamfer Milling on 3D Model, Contour Grinding on 3D Model, Turning:
Finishing, Groove Finishing, Face Groove Finishing.
Show clipped paths: Show the parts of the toolpaths that are in collision (clipped). Specify the colour for
clipped areas.
Tool axis / Collision: Define the display size and colour for the tool axis and collisions.
Input dialogue: NC
NC
Use this function to enter user-defined text blocks such as control instructions or other similar parameters.
This function requires an appropriately configured postprocessor.
As hyperMILL does not perform any syntax or collision checks on the information, the function should only
be used if the machine used can interpret the data correctly.
Position: Position of the NC text in the NC program. Enable the required position and enter your text
directly in the window on the right. Use L oad file to import information from a text file to the selected
location. Select S ave file to save the NC text from all of the specified positions to a text file. Select E dit
external to open an editor in which to enter your NC text.
Free NC text is now also supported by hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining. Only input in
VNC format is permitted. Otherwise, an error message is generated in the hyperMILL
VIRTUAL Machining Center. It is then no longer possible to release the NC program.
Preferred direction
For machines with 5-axis kinematics, define the preferred spindle orientation in machining situations with
at least two solutions.
Not defined: No preferred direction is defined.
Direction used by post processor: The preferred direction is calculated by the postprocessor based on the
kinematics available in the machine model.
hyperMILL
95

For jobs with an activated T ransformation or activated 2 D multi index drilling option, no
preferred direction (solution selection) can be generated and output with the hyperMILL
SIMULATION Center. The following information is displayed:
• M ulti index drilling - no solution selection possible or
• J ob contains transformations - no solution selection possible
It is not possible to select the preferred direction. It is possible that a preferred direction
is simulated in the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center that is different from the preferred
direction used by the postprocessor. To ensure a correct simulation, the hyperMILL
VIRTUAL Machining Center should be used in these cases.
VIRTUAL Machining
The VIRTUAL Machining (V M) function is available with an appropriate licence for the
hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Optimise the NC file.
Preferred direction
For machines with 5-axis kinematics, define the preferred spindle orientation in machining situations with
at least two solutions.
Use global definition: Enable to use the default settings of the VIRTUAL Machining postprocessor for
creating the NC file. Disable the option to use the settings of the current job (the default settings of the
VIRTUAL Machining postprocessor are overwritten in this case). Use P lus or M inus to define the preferred
sign for the rotary axis.
Example BC kinematics: When P lus (1) is specified as the preferred axial direction, select the
one that tilts the component to the viewer.
B
C
1
Force: When the NC Optimizer is activated, the direction of the preferred axis is also taken into account,
however, the NC Optimizer may make a different choice for different reasons (axis limits exceeded,
collision avoidance). This behaviour of the NC Optimizer is disabled by the F orce option.
hyperMILL
96
Preferred C angle (A/B=0)
Define a manual pre-rotation of the C axis before the start of the job with the U se preferred C angle
function. This makes it possible to manually avoid axis limit violations or collision situations.
Example BC kinematics: Specifying C = 180 ensures that the C axis is rotated to 180 degrees
before the start of the job to stop the axis limits from being exceeded.
(1) Tool position inside X axis limit, (2) Tool position outside X axis limit.
1
2
C
B
 C
B
X
Force: When the NC Optimizer is activated, the specified C axis is generally taken into account, however,
the NC Optimizer may make a different choice for different reasons (axis limits exceeded, collision avoid-
ance).
This behaviour of the NC Optimizer is disabled by the F orce option and the C axis is always pre-turned.
Tolerance cycle setting
Depending on the machining situation, use different tolerance values to generate the NC file. The values
influence the machining accuracy on the machine via the N C Generator and so enable an optimal combi-
nation of precision and dynamics adapted to the machining situation.
Roughing, S emi finishing or F inishing are already preset depending on the job and can be can be adapted
as required. Define the required tolerance values in the N C Generator →N C →G eneral →A ccuracy
dialogue.
Additional options
Relevant for two or more jobs with identical tool in direct machining sequence.
Force tool call: If the function is enabled for all jobs, the tool is called from all jobs at the beginning in the
postprocessor run. Safety positioning is carried out before and after e ach tool call. All relevant technology
commands are regenerated after e ach tool call.
If the function is n ot activated, the tool is called only at the beginning of the first job. Safety positioning is
carried out before and after the tool call. All relevant technology commands are regenerated after the tool
call.
The F orce tool call function is available with an appropriate licence for the hyperMILL
VIRTUAL Machining Center. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
hyperMILL
97

NC Optimizer
When the U se NC Optimizer option is selected, the calculated NC program is divided between the axes
that exist in the machine. This way, collision situations and axis limitations are automatically taken into
account so that a checked toolpath is generated on the machine.
The N C Optimizer function is available with an appropriate licence for the hyperMILL
VIRTUAL Machining Optimizer. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
OPEN MIND strongly recommends that you use the N C Optimizer for:
• 5-axis machining with rotary axes that do not rotate endlessly
OPEN MIND recommends that you use the N C Optimizer for:
• 5-axis simultaneous applications
• Machines that cannot move over the table centre
• Machines with an asymmetrical traversing range of the primary rotary axes (for
example, from -7° to 180° or from -120° to 30°)
• Machines in the production environment (small-scale/large-scale production)
• Components that largely fill the available workspace and therefore restrict the
traversing range of the axes
Local NC Optimizer settings
For the I nterpolation, R ewind, P ole and R elink areas, specify whether the VIRTUAL Machining global
settings (option: U se global definition:) or the local settings of the job (option: U se local definition) should
be used to create the NC file.
Interpolation
Max. rotation angle G1: Specify the maximum permissible rotation angle of the machine axes for G1
movements.
Max. rotation angle G0: Specify the maximum permissible rotation angle of the machine axes for G0
movements.
hyperMILL
98
Rewind
Allow split at G0 (for 3D Jobs): If the linking movements within a job cannot be implemented without
a collision for 3D operations, the NC Optimizer changes the movements with the help of a rotary axis.
Requirement: RTCP is activated.
Example BC kinematics: 3D Free Path Milling, collision avoidance by rotating the C axis by 180
degrees.
(1) Collision: C axis not rotated, (2) No collision: C axis rotated.
C
B
1 2
Allow split G1 movements: Enable for machines with head kinematics and limited axis.
Example AC kinematics: 5X Z Level Finishing, a reverse rotation around the C axis takes place
after each Z-level infeed.
hyperMILL
99

C
A
As the tool moves away from the component in a local rewind and then approaches the component again
after the rewind movement in order to continue the machining, this movement is implemented with an
overlap.
The overlap can be controlled with the following parameters:
Blending distance factor: Defines the value of the lateral pushing away from the component as a factor of
the machine tolerance.
Blending length factor: Defines the blending length as a factor of the tool diameter.
Pole
Solution inc. angle: Define the angle increment as part of the solution search for machining operations at
the pole. Default = 90 degrees.
hyperMILL
100
Relink
The original infeed movements within jobs are removed and connected again as specified by the NC
Optimizer. The optimised infeed movements are collision-free and are executed as linear movements on
the shortest possible path.
Additional axes
: Define a value for the preset position of the fixed axis for machines with more than 5 axes. Depending
on the machine kinematics, an angular value, a linear value or both can be defined.
The A dditional axes function depends on the kinematics defined in the machine model
and is available with an appropriate licence for the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining
Optimizer. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
Parameters
Enter further parameters as needed.
Example:
Job end
(End clamp 1)
M0
(Continue with clamp 2)
Before tool change
(Note: run tool measurement cycle)
(If tool diameter is below tolerance, replace with new
tool).
Compound job
A compound jobs allows job lists to be structured clearly. You can combine any 2D, 3D or 5X jobs into a
compound job. For example, you can combine a machining section (roughing, finishing) into a compound
job.
hyperMILL
101

To define a compound job:
1. Use the N ew →C ompound job function on the browser’s shortcut menu or select the jobs to be
included in a compound job and use the A dd to compound job function on the shortcut menu.
2. Specify a n ame and comment for the compound job.
You can also hold down the S HIFT key to move jobs to a c ompound job.
Linking job
A linking job contains other jobs that can be linked with each other in such a way that approach and retract
movements for the entire machining sequence and all linking movements between the individual jobs can
be optimised and monitored for collisions.
Advantages
• Shortened machining times.
• Option to perform complex machining tasks.
• Improved product flexibility.
Requirements
To combine multiple jobs into a linking job,
• for 2D/3D machining jobs, all sub-jobs must use the same tool,
• for turning jobs, all sub-jobs must use the same tool, the tool angles and tool orientation (Invert tool)
must be the same for all sub-jobs,
• for 3D/5X machining jobs, all sub-jobs must use the same tool.
For turning jobs, the following combinations of the Cutting side parameter are possible in the sub-jobs (see
Strategy dialogue page):
Cutting side Outside machining Inside machining Plane Machining
Outside machining x - x
Inside machining - x x
Plane Machining x x x
Drill machining cannot be combined with a linking job.
Defining a linking job
Right-click and select the N ew →L inking job / New →L inking job turning function.
Add job to a linking job
Select the job(s) and then select the A dd to linking job function on the shortcut menu or hold down the
SHIFT key to move the jobs to the previously created l inking job.
hyperMILL
102
The Linking job dialogue
Linking jobs are defined on the following dialogue pages: Tool, Parameters, Setup, Feature, Transforma-
tion, General and NC.
Tool dialogue page
All of the jobs combined into a linking job must contain the same tool. This also applies to 2 D mode and 5X
mode.
Parameters dialogue page
Linking mode
The following linking methods may be used:
2D: Linking of 2D, 3D, drill jobs and turning jobs that share the same frame orientation.
5X: Linking of 3D and 5-axis jobs. It is also possible to link the 2D cycles Pocket Milling and Rest
Machining in 5X mode.
Rapids
Specify the mode for the fast travel movements (rapids) of linked individual jobs.
Skip first and last: Skip the first infeed movement and last retract movement of the individual sub-jobs.
Keep all rapids: Keep all infeed and retract movements of sub-jobs within the linking job.
Conditions
Use min. distance G0: The movements between the jobs are executed as a direct link between pairs of
contour points in G1. Min.
G0 distance: Distance between two machining areas that can be traversed – without tool contact – close to
the surface with machining feedrate (G1).
Planar/ Radial: Specify how the toolpaths of the linked sub-jobs are linked.
(1) Planar, (2) Radial.
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
1 2
Rapid smoothing
Available for the Clearance distance retract mode. Enable the H igh speed option to activate Rapid smooth-
ing (1).
hyperMILL
103

Y
X
2
1
2
3
When machining in 5 X mode, the linking movements are defined without abrupt changes of direction. The S mooth factor
affects the shape of the smoothed movement as a ratio of the length of the connection line (2) to the required "height" of
the movement (3). If the selected smooth factor potentially leads to a collision, the movement is automatically rendered
collision free.
The C learance distance retract mode must be active. The L inking movement with the D istance angle limit ( S etup
dialogue page) must match the rapid smoothing.
Setup dialogue page
Information on:
Model See section The Turning area dia-
logue (page 128)
Check tool see section Check tool (page 272)
Linking movements See section Setup (page 767)
Stock
Enable stock: Select the checkbox to define a collision-checked stockmodel and ensure that rapid link
movements between the sub-jobs cannot collide with the stock.
Transformation dialogue page
The current transformation is executed by calculating the linking job and all copies are linked to collision-
checked rapid link movements. A 5-axis compatible NC file is output.
Example of use
Complete machining of a closed pocket with inclined walls in 5X linking mode without a tool change. The
following jobs are combined in the linking job:
• 3D Free Path Milling,
• 5X Rest Machining, 3D Profile Finishing and
• 5X SWARF Cutting 1 Curve.
hyperMILL
104
Linking job turning
As of Version 2017.1, in Linking job turning only jobs with tools which include cutting point setup can be
combined. A linking job created with an earlier version of hyperMILL can be opened in Version 2017.1.
The linking job can be used if the consistency check is successful, otherwise a new one must be created.
Clearance
Clearance radius X: radius for rapid tool movements in the X direction (1).
Clearance plane Z: plane for rapid tool movements in the Z direction (2).
Clearance distance: distance from the tool to the workpiece in the X direction during linking movements
(3).
Retract mode
The retract mode defines the Z level where the system executes horizontal infeed movements. The mode
set is valid for all machining directions (incl. approach, retract and return movement macros) and for the
profiles machined with them. Exception: Machining in zigzag mode without return macro.
Clearance distance (1): all retract and infeed movements are executed via the clearance distance. Starting
and end positions of an infeed movement in rapid are displaced in Z direction in order to guarantee a
collision-free linear infeed movement. The clearance distance is added to these positions.
Clearance plane (2): all retract and infeed movements are executed via the clearance plane.
hyperMILL
105

X
Z
1 2
Rapid smoothing
Available for the Clearance distance retract mode. Enable the H igh speed option to activate Rapid smooth-
ing (1).
Y
X
2
1
2
3
When machining in 5 X mode, the linking movements are defined without abrupt changes of direction. The S mooth factor
affects the shape of the smoothed movement as a ratio of the length of the connection line (2) to the required "height" of
the movement (3). If the selected smooth factor potentially leads to a collision, the movement is automatically rendered
collision free.
The C learance distance retract mode must be active. The L inking movement with the D istance angle limit ( S etup
dialogue page) must match the rapid smoothing.
NC event
Use NC events to clearly structure the program flow and influence programming by entering commands,
independent of job lists and jobs.
To create an NC event:
1. Use the N ew →N C event function on the browser's shortcut menu.
2. Define the E vent type and enter the respective command under E vent command.
hyperMILL
106
NC events can be freely moved in the job browser. To do this, select the NC event with the left mouse
button and move it to the required position while holding down the mouse button. The content of the NC
Event always remains intact. Control-specific functions and commands are forwarded to the postprocessor
directly by the NC Event.
NC events cannot be simulated or checked for possible collisions. Postprocessing is
only possible in Package mode.
Free NC text is now also supported by hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining. Only input in
VNC format is permitted. Otherwise, an error message is generated in the hyperMILL
VIRTUAL Machining Center. It is then no longer possible to release the NC program.
Associative job copy
Copy of a job in which all parameters correspond to the parameters of the original job. A job copy is
associatively linked with the original job. If a parameter is changed in the original job, then this parameter
will also change in the associative job copy. Parameters cannot be edited. Exception: transformations and
contours.
To create an associative job copy:
1. In the hyperMILL browser, select the job in the job list, right-click and
2. choose the A ssociative job copy function on the shortcut menu.
To unlink the copied job and original job:
1. In the hyperMILL browser, select the copied job, right-click and
2. choose the U nlink associative copy function on the shortcut menu.
All changes to the original job are summarised on the O verview dialogue page.
The associative job copy corresponds to the C opy option when using a mirror within a job definition
(Transformation dialogue page). If you define a mirror on job list level and have enabled the Copy option, a
mirrored associative copy of the original job is created from all jobs in the job list with the parameters and
settings of the original job.
To deactivate the associative link between the original job and the associative job copy for individual
parameters, right-click the relevant parameter and select U nlink.
Changes to this parameter in the original job no longer affect the associative job copy. Conversely, the
parameter can now be edited directly in the job copy without affecting the original job. The associativity
between both jobs is restored using the L ink function.
If you recalculate a job for which an associative job copy exists, you can also recalculate the job copy.
hyperMILL
107

Job Optimization
Optimisation of manually created jobs as well as macro jobs with the aim of reducing
the number of tool changes and shortening machine running times.
Optimisation of manually created jobs
To optimise manually created jobs, use theO ptimization (only compound jobs) function on the job list’s
shortcut menu.
Compound jobs
Group manually created jobs of a job list into compound jobs.
Grouping is also available for macro jobs.
The N o optimization option is enabled by default for manually created jobs. The job steps in the job list are
grouped into compound jobs either by tool or by machining step. Only directly consecutive jobs for which
the tool or the job type remains the same are combined. There is no change in the job sequence.
Example – Group by tool:
1: T2 Centering Center drill Ø8mm
4: T3 Simple Drilling Drill Tool Ø10mm
2: T2 Centering Center drill Ø8mm
6: T2 Simple Drilling Center drill Ø8mm
3: T2 Centering Center drill Ø8mm
5: T3 Simple Drilling Drill Tool Ø10mm
T2 / 8 / Center drill
T3 / 10 / Drill tool
T2 / 8 / Center drill
Job Tool Compound job
No compound jobs: No compound jobs are created.
Group by tool: Jobs with the same tool are combined in a compound job. The name of the generated
compound job is composed as follows: [Tool number / Tool diameter / Tool name].
Group by process step: Job steps of the same job type (same job name) are combined in a compound job.
The name of the generated compound job is composed as follows: [Cycle name].
Optimisation of macro jobs
To optimise macro jobs, use theO ptimization (only compound jobs) function on the job list’s shortcut menu.
Optimisation
Optimise macro jobs. Manually created jobs are not optimised.
hyperMILL
108
No optimization: No jobs are optimised. The sequence of all job steps remains the same.
Optimization with job grouping: Macro jobs are sorted taking into account the tool sequence within macros.
Jobs with different features but the same tool and the same job parameters are combined into one job
step.
Optimization without job grouping: Macro jobs are sorted taking into account the tool sequence within
macros. Identical job steps with the same tool are not combined into one job step. The job steps are sorted
in the order of the tool calls in macros.
Manually created jobs, which are located between macro jobs, remain at their positions in the job list.
Tool Sorting
Optimise macro jobs. Manually created jobs are not optimised.. Requirement: The option O ptimization →
Optimization with job grouping or Optimization →O ptimization without job grouping is enabled.
No sorting: No change in the sequence of tool calls.
With ascending and descending sorting, the logical order of the tools within the macro
has top priority, which means that sorting may not always be maintained correctly or the
same tool may be changed twice.
Sort by ascending diameter: Taking into account the macro order, the tools used are sorted in ascending
order by diameter. E xample: In a component with holes D6, D8, D9 and M10, the holes D6 and D8 are
drilled first, then the core hole for M10 with D8.5 and finally the hole D9. The order within a macro is not
changed.
Sort by descending diameter: Taking into account the order within a macro, the tools used are sorted in
descending order by diameter.
Example: In a component with holes D6, D8, D9 and M10, first the hole for D9 is created, then the core
hole M10 with D8.5 and finally the holes D8 and D6. The order within a macro is not changed.
Multi axis indexing
Prerequisites for multi axis indexing:
• A machine with C axis and/or swivelling milling head (5X machining).
• A drawing in the form of a 3D model.
Programming always takes place in the G17 workplane:
• Infeed in (negative) Z direction; Z axis is perpendicular to the machining side
• Machining in the XY direction.
Hence in multi-axis machining, you first have to define the coordinate system and the frame for each
machining side. See the information in section NC system and frames (page 42) .
hyperMILL
109

X3
X1
Z1
Y1
Z3
Y3
Z2
X2Y2
F1
F3
F2
Machine cycle definition
The job sequence is basically arbitrary. If a tool change optimisation is required, the definition should be
made one page at a time (shorter calculation time).
To do this, open the machining cycle, set the required frame in the S etup input dialogue and define the
job's machining parameters.
At any given time, only the current frame is visible in the CAD drawing. Only those contours that lie on the
frame's XY plane can be selected.
X
Z Y
Tool change optimisation
Before generating the toolpaths, it is possible to optimise tool changes by sorting individual jobs according
to different criteria.
hyperMILL
110
Macro job lists for holes must be expanded into individual jobs prior to tool change optimisation. Use the
Explode function on the shortcut menu for this.
It is possible to sort by different criteria. Use the function you require from the joblist’s shortcut menu.
Sort by tool: Starting with the first tool in the expanded joblist (drilling cycles expanded into individual
drillings), the jobs are sorted by tool number in ascending order, regardless of the frame in the job. The job
sequence can also be sorted again manually.
Sort by frame: The jobs are sorted by frame number. The job and tool sequence already defined for each
frame is retained.
Global editing
Edit job definition parameters for multiple jobs at the same time.
1. In the hyperMILL browser, select the J obs tab, select all jobs, for which common parameters
should be determined.
2.
 To edit, click the icon or right-click and select E dit.
3. The G lobal editing input window opens. Here, you can specify definitions in the following areas for
several jobs.
Edit a parameter by double-clicking the corresponding line. If you move the mouse over a parameter in the
column on the left, the jobs that use this parameter are shown as a tooltip.
If different values are defined for a parameter in the jobs to be edited together, this parameter is highligh-
ted in yellow and can be adjusted accordingly.
If you want to adjust different values for a parameter, click in the line highlighted in yellow.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Job lists/Jobs
New >
Project Assistant: Start the Project Assistant.
hyperMILL
111

Create a new entry (joblist, job, compound job, linking job, NC-event).
Electrode milling: Open the Electrode milling dialogue to generate the data for NC programming (job list,
milling area, stock, clamp, NC system and electrode feature).
Job list, Job...: Create a new element.
Via the J ob... function, open the S elect new operation dialogue that also contains a brief
description of the function and possible applications of the respective cycle in addition to
a graphical representation. Helpful for users who are not yet familiar with the software.
_______________________________________________________________
Compound job, Linking job, Linking job turning, NC event: Create a new element.
_______________________________________________________________
Open a job definition dialogue from the following areas: Probing, Turning, Drilling, 2D Milling, 3D Milling,
3D Advanced Milling, 5X Cavity Milling, 5X Surface Milling, 5X Tube Milling, 5X Blade Milling, 5X Multi-
Blade Milling, 5X Dental Milling.
Load from file: Load data of a job or job list that was previously exported with the U tilities →E xport function
in*.jstformat.
_______________________________________________________________
Macros >
Apply macros: Open the A pply macros dialogue.
View macro database: Open the current macro database.
New macro from job: Open the N ew macro dialogue and create a new macro based on the selected job.
_______________________________________________________________
Optimization: Optimisation of jobs in a job list created by macros according to different criteria with the aim
of reducing the number of tool changes and shortening machine running times.
Optimization (only compound jobs): Optimisation of manually created job steps of a job list. The jobs are
grouped into compound jobs either by tool or by machining step.
_______________________________________________________________
Replace by: Replace the selected job with another job.
Associative job copy: Create an associative job copy from the currently selected job.
Add to compound job: Create a new compound job and add the selected job to the compound job.
Add to linking job: Create a new linking job and add the selected job to the linking job.
Unlink associative copy: Unlink the job and associative job copy.
_______________________________________________________________
Edit: Edit the current element. If several jobs or job lists are selected, parameters can be edited together
(see Global editing).
Copy / Paste / Delete: Entries are managed in the standard Windows manner.
_______________________________________________________________
Stock >
hyperMILL
112
Create stock chain:Create a stock chain for the selected jobs. You can select any jobs in a job list or
compound jobs.
A stock object is created for each job in the hyperMILL browser. To calculate the stock models, use
the S tock →U pdate function on the Jobs shortcut menu or the C alculate function on the shortcut menu
for the stock model entry. The stock models are calculated based on the preceding stock model and the
toolpath of the current job.
Remove stock chain: Delete all unused stock models in a stock chain. The original stock remains intact.
Create: Start the Stock model calculation dialogue to create a new stock model.
Update: Update the stock models for the selected jobs.
_______________________________________________________________
Calculate: Calculate the toolpath file.
Update: Update the toolpath file, transferring modified job parameters to it.
Update clamping position: If subsequent changes are made to the clamping position (J ob list →N CS →
Clamping position), update all jobs in the job list. It is not necessary to recalculate the toolpaths.
_______________________________________________________________
Statistics...: Displays the length and duration of G0, G1 and G2/G3 movements, as well as the dwell times
and number of tool changes for the selected jobs. This also applies to outdated jobs. It is not necessary to
recalculate the toolpaths.
_______________________________________________________________
The following functions for simulation and the NC file are only available with a standard
postprocessor.
Internal simulation: Start the internal simulation.
Internal machine simulation: Start the internal machine simulation.
Simulation Center: Simulate the machining in the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center for the machine de-
fined in the postprocessor. No linking movements are taken into account. For further information, see
section ???TITLE??? (Seite 0 ) and the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center product documentation.
Generate NC file: Perform a postprocessor run for the selected entry (job/job list).
The functions described below for the toolpath preview, NC simulation and NC file are
available only with a hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center licence and the appropriate
postprocessor technology (J ob list →P ostprocessor →M achine administration →N C
Generator).
Toolpath preview: Display the machining in the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center in a preview.
The following restrictions apply:
• No linking movements are simulated.
• No optimisation is available with the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Optimizer technology.
hyperMILL
113

NC simulation: Generate NC code for the machining and simulate the machining in the hyperMILL VIRTU-
AL Machining Center.
Postprocessor messages: Display the postprocessor messages in a text editor and save in a text format if
required.
_______________________________________________________________
Use the C heck NC status function to check the current status of the NC file. The status is displayed as
follows:
NC file does not exist.
NC file exists and is up to date.
NC file exists, is approved and saved.
NC file exists, is approved and saved but is no longer up to date.
NC file exists, is no longer up to date and must therefore be recalculated.
Generate NC file: Generate an NC file for the machining selected in the hyperMILL browser. The postpro-
cessor messages are displayed in the P ostprocessor dialogue. If required, start the hyperMILL VIRTUAL
Machining Center by double-clicking the
 entry. If the function is used again in the same job list and
with the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center open, double-clicking the
 entry again will start a new
instance of the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center.
Generate NC file (Batch mode): Generate an NC file for the machining selected in the hyperMILL browser.
The postprocessor messages are displayed in the P ostprocessor dialogue and the hyperMILL VIRTUAL
Machining Center is started automatically afterwards. If the function is used again in the same job list and
with the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center open, the machining will open in the same instance of the
hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center. Any existing main program will be overwritten.
Generate NC file (Keep mode): Generate an NC file for the machining selected in the hyperMILL browser.
The postprocessor messages are displayed in the P ostprocessor dialogue and the hyperMILL VIRTUAL
Machining Center is started automatically afterwards. If the function is used again in the same job list and
with the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center open, the machining will open in the same instance of the
hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center and will be added to an existing main program. Requirement: The
Job list →P ostprocessor →S ingle mode function is enabled.
Generate NC file (Manual stock selection): Generate an NC file for the machining selected in the
hyperMILL browser. First select a stock from the job list manually. The postprocessor messages are
displayed in the P ostprocessor dialogue. If required, start the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center by
double-clicking the
 entry.
_______________________________________________________________
Job view >
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Display calculation info: Display information on the current calculation.
Select jobs to calculate / S elect all jobs / S elect jobs to check: Select the jobs to calculate, all jobs or the
jobs to check in a joblist.
Search job by ID: Select this option to search for a job in an extensive machining sequence with the help
of the J ob-ID. The job that is found is opened.
Open / E xpand all: Open the detailed view for the selected job or all the jobs in a joblist in the hyperMILL
browser.
Collapse / C ollapse all: Close the detailed view for the selected job or all the jobs in a joblist in the
hyperMILL browser.
Expand linking jobs / Expand compound jobs: Display the sub-jobs of linking jobs or compound jobs.
hyperMILL
114
Sort by frame and tool / S ort by frame / S ort by tool / S ort by job IDs: Sort the jobs in a joblist, in order, for
example, to perform a tool change optimisation.
_______________________________________________________________
Utilities >
hyperVIEW...: Start the hyperVIEW simulation program.
hyperVIEW report: Create a report with information on the tool and job parameters. hyperVIEW will start,
after which you can select which report should be created (joblist, tool list with graphics or tool list). To do
so, select the desired template file in the *.xsl format.
hyperMILL Report: Create a report directly from hyperMILL with information on the tool and job parame-
ters. Select which report should be created (joblist, tool list with graphics or tool list). To do so, select the
desired template file in the *.xsl format. Job graphics are currently not supported in the joblist report.
Rest material display: Simulate the removal of material for the job and display the remaining material.
Analysis: Start the analysis dialogue with functions for surface analysis.
TOOLPATH.EDIT... : Start the TOOLPATH.EDIT program for machining toolpaths.
VERICUT ... / N CSIMUL ...:/ C OLLISION SAFEGUARD ... Start an external simulation program (VERI-
CUT /NCSIMUL / COLLISION SAFEGUARD).
Export: Save a job or job list to an external file (file format:*.jstfor jobs,*.xmlfor tools). You can
import the data to another job list or another model using the N ew →L oad from file shortcut menu function.
User variables: Open the User variables dialogue in order to define a user variable. Use user variables to
specify parameter values in the job definition.
Electrode user variables: Open the Electrode user variables dialogue to check or display production-rele-
vant parameters (spark gap) (CAD parameters, milling parameters).
Check model: Check the consistency of the contours assigned to the job.
_______________________________________________________________
Explode: Expand macro job lists for drilling jobs into individual jobs.
_______________________________________________________________
Toolpaths >
Check toolpath status: Check whether the entry (job/joblist) was calculated using the current definition or
whether it has to be recalculated.
Delete toolpath files: Delete the toolpaths for the selected jobs or job lists.
Show tool: Only available for the T oolpath Edit cycle. Displays the tool that is currently used in the cycle.
Show / H ide / A utoshow / R ead / D elete: Show, hide, automatically display, read or delete the toolpaths of
the current job.
Show all / All off / Delete all: Show, hide or delete all toolpaths of the current model.
Show G0 only / Show G1 only: Only display the G1 or G0 movements of the toolpaths.
Read: Read in the calculated toolpaths.
_______________________________________________________________
hyperMILL setup: Open the Setup hyperMILL dialogue with the hyperMILL basic settings.
Licence status...: Open the L icence status dialogue.
Open directory > Open the directory for the global working space, model or project.
hyperMILL
115

Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn the feedback on/off (when the mouse pointer is in the browser window).
hyperMILL
116
Transformations
A transformation is a relative movement within a reference coordinate system. The starting point is a start
reference (start coordinate system) and the end point is a target reference (target coordinate system). The
movement can comprise a linear and/or rotating movement.
Y
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Z
X
In hyperMILL, transformation refers to the duplication and positioning of toolpaths for the production of
identical and/or similar components. hyperMILL supports mirroring, linear patterns, circular patterns and
general patterns.
Advantages
• Significantly shorter programming times for identical and/or similar geometries
• Associativity of the transformation when changes are made to the geometry
• Flexibility as a result of partial deactivation of the direct connection between the base element and
the transformed element
• No limitations for 2D, 3D and 5X machining
Transformations add a transformation rule to the toolpath calculated. hyperMILL displays the resulting
jobs / job copies in the form of graphical feedback. When mirroring toolpaths using the M irror mode →
Mirror path function of the T ransformation dialogue page, only the calculated toolpath is mirrored, not the
model or stock.
The NC is output as if a new frame was used for the resulting job. As a result, positioning movements can
sometimes occur on 5-axis machines when using rotation axes.
It is possible to use NC control functions (e.g., zero point moves, subprograms, etc.).
However, they require a special adjustment to the postprocessor. Please contact your
OPEN MIND partner.
Examples
1. Circular pattern in the plane with 3D postprocessor (no index postprocessor)
hyperMILL
117

The postprocessor maps the frame system of all copies on the NCS and creates link rapids on the
clearance plane of the jobs.
2. Circular pattern in the plane with 5-axis postprocessor
Depending on the settings, the postprocessor outputs a different table/head orientation for each
position, if required. Additional movements occur between all copies, which correspond to a safe
positioning logic of the machine.
Linking movements created by the postprocessor are not collision-checked
against the 3D model. You therefore need to ensure that the clearance plane is
above all collision-relevant elements.
3. Using the frame ID for postprocessors
If your postprocessor requires you to define a frame I D or a frame c omment, your postprocessor is
incompatible with toolpaths that were created using the hyperMILL Transformation function.
For this reason, please only use toolpaths without transformations for these postprocessors.
4. Structuring the NC output
For recurring toolpaths that were created using t ransformations, a simplified NC output is not
generally provided (for example, as a subprogramme or part of the programme that repeats).
If you wish to have a suitable simplified NC output, contact your OPEN MIND dealer. Please also
bear in mind that a fee may be required for postprocessor enhancements.
For toolpaths generated by a t ransformation, only one safety check with a tolerance of 0.05 mm
will be carried out. Collisions with a sufficiently small overlap may not be recognised under certain
circumstances. Please check the geometric conditions and parameters of the t ransformation care-
fully before machining. This constraint does not hold for the m irror.
Define and apply transformations
Define transformations and apply them in a job.
Define
To define a transformation, switch to the F rames tab in the hyperMILL browser and select the desired
transformation from the shortcut menu in the T ransformation area or create a new transformation.
Apply it to a job
In order to apply a transformation in a job, change to the T ransformation dialogue page and select the
Active checkbox.
Now select the type of transformation under S election and then click the
 icon to select a transformation
or click the
 icon to create a new transformation.
For toolpaths generated by a transformation, no precise safety check will be carried out.
Collisions with a sufficiently small overlap may not be recognised under certain circum-
stances. Please check the geometric conditions and parameters of the transformation
carefully before machining.
Output origin
Available if the A llow multiple origins option has been enabled in the job list (J ob list settings dialogue
page).
Select the required origin from the list or click the icon (1) to define a new origin. Click the icon (2) to
modify an origin.
hyperMILL
118
Mirror mode
The M irror mode option is available if the M anufacturing parameters →C opy function is
enabled for the mirroring.
Enable Mirror path to only mirror the toolpath and not the geometry.
Advantages: Improved performance, easy to use.
Limitations: C limb milling becomes C onventional milling and vice versa, no collision check is performed,
not available for compound job or job list, but only for an individual job.
Linear pattern
You can use a linear pattern in a job, compound job or linking job.
Define
1. Define the T ransformation name and a C omment in the T ransformations dialogue.
2. Use X direction / Y direction to define the direction of the pattern.
Structure: If the F ixed distance option is selected, the Number of elements defined and the Dis-
tance specified between each element are taken into account when creating the transformation. If
the F it elements option is selected, the Number of elements defined is fitted to the Length of the
entire pattern.
Apply it to a job
To apply a linear pattern to the job:
1. Navigate to the T ransformation dialogue page, enable the A ctive checkbox and select the required
linear pattern under S election.
2. Under S tart reference, specify the start coordinate system to be used as a basis for the relative
movement of the transformation. Utilise the U se job frame option to use the active job frame.
Alternatively, select a frame or origin.
Target reference: The target coordinate system to be used as a basis for the relative movement of
the transformation. Use the U se start reference option to utilise the start reference system.
Examples of use
2D Pocket Milling, identical start and target reference. Pattern: X direction, specifications: Fixed distance,
Number of elements: 3, Distance: 50.
The N umber of elements option always accounts for the base element. With other
words, two transformations and one base element = three elements.
hyperMILL
119

Z
Y X
50
2D Pocket Milling, deviating (1) Start reference and (2) Target reference. Pattern: X direction, specifica-
tions: Fixed distance, Number of elements: 3, Distance: 50.
Z Y
X
Z Y
X
1
2
Circular pattern
You can use a circular pattern in a job, compound job or linking job.
Define
1. Define the T ransformation name and a C omment in the T ransformations dialogue.
2. Under P attern, define the A xis type. To do this, use the options P oints (Start point / E nd point),
Line, Axis of cylinder or Frame Z-Axis.
3. Next, define the s tructure of the pattern.
The F it to total angle option is used to duplicate the toolpath as a circular pattern, while taking
account of the n umber of elements and the t otal angle.
The F ixed step angle option is used to duplicate the toolpath as a circular pattern, while taking
account of the s tep angle and the n umber of elements.
Apply it to a job
How to apply a circular pattern to the job:
1. Navigate to the T ransformation dialogue page, enable the A ctive checkbox and select the required
circular pattern under S election.
hyperMILL
120
2. Under S tart reference, specify the start coordinate system to be used as a basis for the relative
movement of the transformation. Utilise the U se job frame option to use the active job frame.
Alternatively, select a frame or origin.
Target reference: The target coordinate system to be used as a basis for the relative movement of
the transformation. Use the U se start reference option to utilise the start reference system.
Example of use
2D Pocket Milling, identical start and target reference. Axis type: Line (1), structure: Fit to total angle,
Number of elements: 6, Total angle: 360.
General pattern
You can use a general pattern in a job, compound job or linking job.
Define
1. Define the T ransformation name and a C omment in the T ransformations dialogue.
2. Under P attern, select A dd target reference system. To do so, define a target reference as a frame
or layer
 .
3. If required, change the orientation of the X and Z axes, , the origin
 or the frame
 .
Meaning of the icons:
1. Move target reference to the start of the machining sequence
2. Move target reference up in the machining sequence
3. Delete target reference
4. Move target reference down in the machining sequence
5. Move target reference to the end of the machining sequence
hyperMILL
121

Apply it to a job
How to apply a general pattern to the job:
1. Navigate to the T ransformation dialogue page, enable the A ctive checkbox and select the required
circular pattern under S election.
2. Enable the K eep original job option to ensure that the toolpath on which the transformation is
based stays the same.
3. Under S tart reference, specify the start coordinate system to be used as a basis for the relative
movement of the transformation. Utilise the U se job frame option to use the active job frame.
Alternatively, select a frame or origin.
Example of use
2D Contour Milling on 3D Model, (1) Start reference, (2) Target reference 1, (3) Target reference 2.
hyperMILL transformations support machining with clamping cubes and multiple clamping provided the NC
data output can be referenced on one common origin (NCS) or one common machining origin.
If you would like origin tables or other control functions to be supported, please contact
your OPEN MIND partner. To support these functions, we need to organise a special
consultation session, define an adapted clamping cube and modify the postprocessor.
Mirror
This special type of transformation mirrors the base geometry. A prerequisite for this is the symmetry of the
part used. HyperMILL calculates new toolpaths on the basis of the mirrored geometry.
hyperMILL
122
The Mirror mode →M irror path option in the job definition, T ransformation dialogue page
is used to prevent the geometry from being mirrored.
Advantages: Improved performance, easy to use.
Limitations: C limb milling becomes C onventional milling and vice versa, no collision
check is performed, not available for compound job or job list, but only for an individual
job.
You can use a mirror in a job, compound job or job list.
Advantages
• Full associativity between the base geometry and the mirrored element (job, compound job or job
list)
• No limitations for 2D, 3D and 5X machining
• Flexibility as a result of partial deactivation of the direct link between the base element and the
mirrored element
• Retention of technology parameters (such as auto climb, automatic macros or optimised linking
movements) in the mirror.
• Patterns can be combined.
The mirroring of turning jobs is not possible due to a risk of collision. This also applies to
the Turning drilling mode in drilling cycles.
Climb milling/Conventional milling
When mirroring curve machinings in the 2D Contour Milling, 3D Free Path Milling and 5X Contouring
cycles, a distinction is drawn between whether machining takes place to the side of the contour (options:
Left/ Right) or on the contour (option: O n contour) .
(1) When machining takes place on the contour, the curve is mirrored, including the start point, to guaran-
tee geometrically symmetric material removal.
(2) When machining takes place at the side of the contour, the direction of the contour in the mirroring is
inverted to also guarantee equal climb to the contour in the mirrored machining.
hyperMILL
123

Y X
Z
Y X
Z
1 2
Define
1. Navigate to the T ransformation dialogue, define a T ransformation name and enter a C omment, if
required.
2. When performing the m irror definition, use the L evel, T hree points or L ine and P oint options and
select the geometric elements. If required, reverse the surface normal.
Apply
How to apply a mirror:
1. Enable the mirror in the job, compound job or job list (select the E nabled checkbox) and select the
required mirror under S election.
2. Enable the C opy option to create a mirror of the original (job, compound job or job list). In the
hyperMILL browser, a mirrored copy of the original element is created and associatively linked
with the original. All parameters are greyed out in the mirrored jobs and cannot be edited directly.
As a result of the direct link (associativity) between the original job and the mirrored copy, all
changes to the original job are also taken into account in the copy during the recalculation.
In mirrored machining jobs, you can remove the link between all parameters to the origi-
nal job and adjust them individually! Right-click the respective location in the greyed-out
dialogue and select U nlink. The parameter can now be edited directly in the job copy.
The associativity between both jobs is restored using the L ink function.
Examples of use
3D Rest Machining, mirroring the part of a component. The mirror is defined in a job within a job list. (1)
Original job, (2) Mirror plane, (3) Mirrored job.
hyperMILL
124
Mirroring a component. The mirror is defined in the job list. (1) Component, (2) Mirrored component, (3)
Mirror plane, (4) Fixtures.
1
2
3
4
Job list comments are transferred to a new, mirrored job list when a mirror is created.
This also applies to defined materials. These c annot be changed in the mirrored job list.
Mirrors and stock models
Stock models which are to be reflected, must be in *. format. To mirror a job list that uses a stock model:
1. On the M irror dialogue page in the joblist, select the mirror plane and enable the C opy option to
create a (mirrored) copy of the joblist that you have already defined.
2. On the M odels dialogue page in the mirrored job list, define the stock model that you want to use
for the mirror. The resulting stock model of the original job list can also be used for this purpose.
3. Assign this stock model to the first job contained in the job list and enable the G enerate resulting
stock option.
4. Check the job status of the jobs contained in the job list and calculate the mirrored job list.
hyperMILL
125

Resulting stock
Resulting stock is also mirrored during mirroring ( J ob list →M irror) if the M anufacturing parameters →
Copy function is activated.
Mirror stock chain
A stock chain is also mirrored during mirroring ( J ob list →M irror) if the M anufacturing parameters →C opy
function is activated.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Transformations
New mirror: Define a new mirror.
New linear pattern, N ew circular pattern, N ew general pattern: Create a new linear, circular or general
pattern.
Edit...: Edit the definitions for the currently selected entry.
Copy, Cut, Paste, Delete: Entries are managed in the standard Windows manner.
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Usage: Display jobs in which the selected element is used.
hyperMILL setup: Open the dialogue for inputting the basic settings of hyperMILL.
Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn the feedback on/off for the selected transformation.
hyperMILL
126
Collision check preparations
Specify a milling area or turning area to define the collision-checked part of the CAD model.
Define a collision-checked clamping area to fix the workpiece during machining.
General information
The M illing area or T urning area defines the area of the CAD model to be machined that is checked for
collisions at the same time. The F ixture area is also checked for collisions; this includes those areas of the
CAD model that are used to fix the part during machining.
hyperMILL automatically generates a polyhedron model (3DF format) at a suitably high surface resolution
(accuracy) for the M illing area, T urning area or C lamping area. For this purpose, the CAD model is
subdivided into separate machining areas as required by the collision-checking function.
All subareas of the model not inside the milling area, turning area or clamping area are not collision-
checked. Inside the milling area/turning area, you can exclude areas from machining (with the help of s top
surfaces, for example).
The machining area within the milling area is defined
• by defining a b oundary (possible for all 3D and 5X cycles) or
• by defining m illing surfaces (possible for the following cycles: 3D / 5X Profile Finishing, 3D / 5X Z
Level Finishing, 3D Z Level Shape Finishing and 3D / 5X Rest Machining).
Define milling area
1. In the hyperMILL browser, double-click to open the job list.
2. On the Part data dialogue page, select the D efined option and select a milling area.
3.
 Define a new milling area or
 modify a milling area.
Alternatively, open the dialogue via the job definition on the Setup dialogue page or using the N ew milling
area shortcut menu in the hyperMILL browser on the Models dialogue page.
The Milling area dialogue
The dialogue consists of the D efinition and Milling area dialogue pages.
On the Definition dialogue page, define the elements that belong to the milling area. On the Milling area
dialogue page, define the name and storage location for the milling area.
File: Click the P ath button to select a 3DF or STL file.
Definition dialogue page
Mode
Define the mode for the milling area definition.
Surface selection: hyperMILL automatically calculates the resolution for the selected milling areas depend-
ing on the machining tolerance. You can select a total of five surface groups with different resolutions and
stock allowances.
You cannot use an external polyhedron file to define the milling area for the following
cycles: 3D Profile Finishing, 5X Profile Finishing, 3D Z Level Finishing, 5X Z Level
Finishing, 3D Automatic Rest Machining and 5X Rest Machining.
Current selection
hyperMILL
127

Group name: Specify the Surface Group’s name. A surface can only be allocated to one Surface Group.
You assign the groups in the job definition.
Surfaces: Click one of the icons to select the surfaces to be converted.
Allowance: Height of the allowance that will be used in the cycles with multiple allowances. The value is
added to the allowance that is defined within the cycle.
Define filter
Use a filter to define geometric elements.
1.
 Click the icon to open the F ilter definition dialogue, select the A ctive checkbox and enable the
required filter option: U se colour filter, Use tag filter or Use layer filter.
2. Then click the
 and
 icons to A dd / select colour filter or A dd / select tag filter and define the
colour or tag class. If required, click the
 icon to select the surfaces that are to be used as the
basis for the filter definition.
3. If a layer filter or a layer container filter is to be used, select the L ayer filter or Layer container filter
checkbox. Then click the
 and
 icons to A dd / select layer filter orAdd/Select layer container
filter and define the layer/layer container.
4. To do this, in the L ayer / L ayer container line, click the icon
 /
 to select a layer or a layer
container that will be used for the filter definition. Enable the U se wildcard (\\*) option to search
for character strings that appear before or after the placeholder in a name. You can also use two
placeholders to search for strings in between.
5. To delete one or all filters, click the C olour, Layer or T ag class line and use the D elete / Delete all
function on the shortcut menu.
6. After completing the filter definition, click the
 icon to include the elements found in the CAD
model on the basis of the filter definition in the selection.
No filter function is available for hyperMILL for Autodesk ® Inventor®. Only the colour filter is available
for hyperMILL for SOLIDWORKS.
Milling area dialogue page
Milling area information
Name: Define the name of the milling area. This is the same as the name specified in the hyperMILL
browser.
Comment: If necessary, enter a comment.
File settings
Path: Define the storage location of the milling area. Corresponds to the value defined in the Setup
hyperMILL dialogue, on the A pplication tab (Default paths).
File prefix: Part of the file name of the calculated 3DF file. File name structure: F ile prefix-$-resolution.3df.
3DF file calculation
A 3DF file is calculated automatically when a new job is calculated, provided all the entries in the Milling
area dialogue have been made correctly beforehand.
Define turning area
1. In the hyperMILL browser, go to the Jobs tab and open the required j ob by double-clicking it. On
the Setup tab, select the C ollision check option and
2.
 click the icon to define a new turning area or
hyperMILL
128
3.
 click the icon to modify a turning area.
Alternatively, open the dialogue via the N ew turning area shortcut menu in the hyperMILL bowser on the
Models tab.
The Turning area dialogue
General
Name / Comment: Specify a name and, if necessary, a comment for the turning area.
Turning area
Contour: Select a (closed) contour to define the collision-checked turning area.
Click the icon to open the C reate turning area from model dialogue.
For information on the C reate turning area from model dialogue, see the following section (page 129) .
Create turning area from model
Frame for turning axis
Select a frame for the turning axis from the list.
Define the C olour and L ayer of the turning contour. Select U se model colours to adopt the current colours
from the model.
Define the resolution (fineness) of the turning area under S urfaces →R esolution.
Select surfaces or a solid. hyperMILL automatically creates a turning contour that defines the turning
area. An entry is created in the hyperMILL browser and a Contour feature is created in the feature
browser.
Define fixture
1. In the hyperMILL browser, go to the Jobs tab and open the required J oblist by double-clicking. On
the Models tab, activate the D efined option and select a fixture.
2.
 Click the icon to define a new fixture area or edit an existing fixture area.
Alternatively, open the dialogue via the N ew fixture area shortcut menu in the hyperMILL browser on the
Models tab.
The Fixture area dialogue
The dialogue consists of the D efinition and Fixture area dialogue pages.
Definition dialogue page
Mode
Surface selection: Select the surfaces that are to be used as fixtures.
File: Click the P ath button to select a 3DF or STL file. If necessary, adjust the a llowance.
Current selection
Surfaces: Click one of the icons to select the surfaces to be used as fixtures.
Define filter
Use a filter to define geometric elements.
1.
 Click the icon to open the F ilter definition dialogue, select the A ctive checkbox and enable the
required filter option ( C olours, Layer, Tag).
2.
 Click the icons to define a new filter and
hyperMILL
129

3.
 Click the icon to select the surfaces that are to be used as the basis for the filter definition or
4.
 click the icon in the L ayer line to select a layer that will be used for the filter definition.
Enable the U se wildcard (\\*) option to search for character strings that appear before or after the
placeholder in a layer name. Two placeholders can also be used to search for character strings in
between.
5.
 Click the icon to update the filter definition.
To delete a filter, click the Colour, Layer or Tag class line and use the D elete function on the shortcut
menu.
No filter function is available for hyperMILL for Autodesk ® Inventor®. Only the colour filter is available
for hyperMILL for SOLIDWORKS.
Tool safe distance: Minimum distance between the tool and the fixture.
The T ool safe distance defined for the F ixture area should not fall below 0.1 mm (0.004
inch). Values between 0.1 mm (0.004 inch) and 0.5 mm (0.02 inch) may lead to long
calculation times if the collision check is on and the stop/clip tolerance is small.
A collision check against the defined fixture area is not supported for jobs with the following tools: Cham-
fered Cutter, T-Slot Cutter, Woodruff Cutter, Barrel Cutter, Turning Tool, Recessing Tool, Axial Recessing
Tool and Threading Tool.
Fixture area dialogue page
The fixture area may be defined for the job list only and not for a job.
Specify a N ame and Comment for the fixture.
File settings
Only available if the fixture has been defined in the S urface selection mode.
Click the P ath button to define the storage location.
File prefix: Define the name of the fixture.
Functions on the shortcut menu: Milling / turning areas
New milling area / N ew turning area / N ew fixture area: Create a new milling area, turning area or fixture
area.
Edit... : Change definitions for the tab entry currently selected.
Copy / Cut / Paste / Delete: Entries are managed in the standard Windows manner.
Messages: Display messages (notices, errors, warnings) for the selected entry.
Usage: Display jobs in which the selected element is used.
hyperMILL setup: Open the Setup hyperMILL dialogue with the hyperMILL basic settings.
Feedbacks / No feedbacks: Turn the feedback display on/off for the selected entry.
Collision checking with the hyperMILL Converter
A collision check can either be performed by defining milling areas in the hyperMILL browser or using the
hyperMILL Converter (polyhedron model). Model areas located on disabled layers are not converted.
You have to create at least one 3DF file (polyhedron model) for each CAD model. Areas with a different
accuracy and different stock allowances can be entered in a 3DF file.
hyperMILL
130
Several 3DF files are required for CAD models that exceed the travel range of the machine and therefore
need to be moved and reclamped during machining.
Recommendation: Always convert as many surfaces and solids as possible in one process. The conver-
sion of individual areas with a higher resolution should always include adjacent surfaces.
All 3DF files belonging to a model become invalid if the model changes position in the
coordinate system, is turned or scaled.
Use the hyperMILL Converter menu to start the Converter.
The hyperMILL Converter dialogue
The hyperMILL Converter dialogue consists of the S etup and Options dialogue pages.
Setup dialogue page
3DF file: Select the storage location for the 3DF file. Set the default storage location in the h yperMILL
settings dialogue. The model name with the*.3dffile extension is used as the file name.
Resolution
Mathematical resolution: Specify the resolution of edge curve circle segments in G1 lengths using the
maximum chordal height. Set the surface resolution to be somewhat finer than the dimensional accuracy
required in production.
Recommendation: roughing 0.5 to 0.1 mm, finishing 0.05 to 0.01 mm, HSC machining 0.005 to 0.001 mm.
Max. facet length: Controls the maximum facet length within the 3DF model. Can be defined for each
group in group definitions.
If a sufficiently precise definition cannot be achieved using the Mathematical resolution function (for
example, with surfaces that are only slightly curved), a limit can be set.
Selection options
All solids, All surfaces, All: Select one of these options if no user-specific selection for conversion is to be
used and the selected areas are all to be converted with the same mathematical resolution.
User-defined
Surfaces: Select solids or surfaces to be converted. The same mathematical resolution applies to all
selected surfaces/solids.
hyperMILL
131

Groups
Group definition: Select this option if you want to convert areas with different mathematical resolutions
and/or different stock allowances, in order, for example, to define different collision and protected areas.
A coarse resolution is sufficient for roughing areas. A finer resolution should be defined for different fine
machining processes.
The group definition is relevant for: Profile Finishing, Equidistant Finishing, Iso Machining, Free Path
Milling.
Groups dialogue page
Groups
A 3DF file can contain up to five groups of surfaces and/or solids with different mathematical resolutions
and different stock allowances. A surface can only be allocated to one Surface Group.
Current selection
Group name: Name of the surface(s).
Surfaces:Select the solids or surfaces to be converted.
Mathematical resolution: Surface resolution of the model.
Allowance: Remaining material on the workpiece. If more than five groups are required to machine a
model, create the respective number of 3DF files with different names. You assign the 3DF files in the job
definition.
Max. facet length: Maximum facet length of the surfaces within a group.
Options dialogue page
Mode of conversion
New 3DF file: The selected objects will be converted at the set mathematical resolution and a new 3DF file
will be created.
Add to existing 3DF file: The selected objects will be converted at the set mathematical resolution and
added to the existing 3DF file. In this way, several areas with different mathematical resolutions can be
combined into one 3DF file and later modifications to the model can be included.
Does not apply to group definitions.
Save existing 3DF file
Yes: When adding surfaces, the existing 3DF file that the current conversion process is going to expand
can be backed up by saving it under a different name.
Save as: Select the path and file name for saving the existing 3DF file.
No: An existing 3DF file is saved under an existing path and file name with the addition of the new
surfaces/solids to be converted.
hyperMILL
132
Calculate and analyse toolpaths
Prerequisites, information and options for calculating toolpaths.
Delete, read, update and analyse toolpaths.
Requirements
1. Correct job sequence: The sequence of jobs in the job list matches the machining order.
2. Correct job definition: Before calculating a toolpath check jobs that have an error or warning
notification. Use the M essages function on the shortcut menu for this. If these are not manually
checked, all messages will be displayed prior to the toolpath calculation.
3. For 3D and 5-axis machining, a m illing area must be present in order to calculate a toolpath.
Jobs whose machining ended with an error should only be post processed after an extensive check.
General settings
The system of units that has been set is valid for the toolpath calculation. Changes to the measurement
system are not permitted after the jobs, tools and frames have been defined. Relevant settings for calculat-
ing toolpaths are specified in the hyperMILL Settings dialogue, on the C alculation tab.
Job list-specific settings
The following are defined on a job-specific basis:
• Name and path of toolpaths
• NCS (program zero point)
• Original stock (if necessary) and model
• Postprocessor-specific settings
The NCS must be identical for all jobs within a job list. If the NCS is moved, previously
calculated jobs become invalid.
Job-specific settings
The frame is set on a job-specific basis.
The display colours and sizes for the toolpath and collision output can also be set on a job-specific basis.
Calculate toolpaths
Either directly in the job definition (for an individual job) or in the hyperMILL browser (for an individual job,
multiple jobs or all the jobs in a job list).
In the job definition
Calculate: The main purpose of this method of creating a toolpath is to enable a quick check of the
work-through of an individual job.
In the hyperMILL browser
Select the required jobs or job list and then select the C alculate function from the shortcut menu.
When calculating/updating one or more linking jobs, the system displays a message asking whether
you want to recalculate all sub-jobs. If you choose No, only the linking job, and not its sub-jobs, are
recalculated.
Prior to the calculation, the messages stored for the jobs or joblists to be calculated are displayed.
Ignore: Ignore the messages and calculate the job.
hyperMILL
133

Ignore all: Ignore all messages and calculate all jobs.
Cancel: Cancel the calculation.
Edit: Open the dialogue (Job/Joblist) and edit the settings.
During the calculation, the message window displays information on the status of the calculation. The
calculation can be controlled as follows:
Cancel the toolpath calculation.
Stop the toolpath calculation.
Continue the toolpath calculation.
For some machining cycles, temporary toolpaths are displayed initially that correspond to the calculation
sequence. Once the calculation has finished, the calculated toolpaths will be displayed if you have selec-
ted the D isplay toolpaths option in the hyperMILL settings dialogue.
If the system identifies collisions while calculating the toolpaths, they are also displayed graphically.
Information on the calculation process is displayed in the window that appears at the same time. In the
hyper MILL settings dialogue, enable the required option under Message mode on the Application dialogue
page. In addition, various messages can be viewed in the report file. The report file (*.rep) is stored by
default in the G lobal Working Space.
If the name of a job list or a job comment is changed after the toolpaths have been
calculated, it is n ot necessary to subsequently recalculate the toolpaths of the job list.
hyperMILL automatically adapts the toolpaths accordingly.
Delete toolpaths
Delete all toolpaths using the hyperMILL D elete toolpaths menu or via the shortcut menu T oolpaths →
Delete all
Delete the toolpaths of one or several jobs via T oolpaths →D elete on the shortcut menu.
Read toolpaths
Read toolpaths and display in the CAD system.
Distinguish between the following:
1. Reading of toolpaths for a job (for example, after deletion) via the T oolpaths →R ead shortcut
menu.
2.
 Reading of any toolpaths (for example, for purposes of analyses) via the R ead toolpath hy-
perMILL menu. Open the dialogue from the shortcut menu of a job list or job.
Toolpath properties
Use job settings: Take the colours for G0 and G1 movements and the tool axis from the job. Disable this
option if other colours should be used. Set the display of the tool axis (Off, Small, Normal, Large).
Show clipped paths: Show the parts of the toolpaths that are in collision (clipped). Specify the colour for
clipped areas.
hyperMILL
134
Analysis toolpath
Toolpath properties
Display coordinate values of toolpath points in relation to a reference coordinate system. Show tool vectors
in any toolpath point. Display feedrate, spindle speed and sequential number for each toolpath point. Show
the job name for a toolpath. Show the direction of movement at the start within the toolpath.
Display feedrate values of the toolpaths with different colours.
For further information, see the product documentation for hyperCAD-S.
Analysis toolpath
hyperMILL →A nalysis toolpath
Show toolpath
Show toolpath
hyperMILL →S how toolpath →S how all
Hide toolpath
hyperMILL →S how toolpath →H ide/Show
Only show the toolpath segments with G0 movements.
hyperMILL →S how toolpath →S how G0 only
Only show the toolpath segments with G1 movements.
hyperMILL →S how toolpath →S how G1 only
The starting point and machining direction of a tool are indicated by an icon (1). Available for hyperCAD-S.
hyperMILL
135

Update calculated toolpaths
Changes to the feedrate, spindle RPM or comment do not require a recalculation of the job for the
following cycles.
- all 3D cycles except Form Pocket
- all 5X cavity cycles except Z-level roughing and cutting edge
- all 5X surface cycles
- 5X Blade Top Milling
- 5X MB Point Milling
To change the spindle RPM or feedrate of the tool, choose one of the following options:
1. Change the value for this job only directly on the Tool tab of the job definition. To do so, select the
Unlink command from the S pindle RPM / F eedrate shortcut menu in the C utting profile section.
Enter the value directly into the dialogue.
2. Change the value for the tool in the T echnology tab of the tool definition.
 Click the icon to open
the Edit tool dialogue and enter the required changes on the T echnology tab.
Then update the toolpath file in the hyperMILL browser using the U pdate shortcut menu.
Information on calculated toolpaths
Information is available for the following via a quickinfo (tooltip): frame, job ID, job name, comment, job
type, linked job, tool ID and tool name.
Configure the information displayed on the hyperCAD menu F ile →O ptions →T ooltip content . To do this,
move the elements from the A vailable TAGs area to the T ooltip content area.
The Toolpath Edit cycle
Use the T oolpath Edit cycle to delete certain sections in calculated toolpaths using a boundary and link the
remaining parts of the toolpath together or split a toolpath on the basis of the tool life in order to exchange
the tool or the inserts.
A collision check is available for the following tool types: ball mill, end mill, bullnose end mill. A warning
message appears if machining is carried out with a different tool. The job to be edited and the cycle
Toolpath Edit represent a jointly managed unit. Changes in the original job are reproducible with the same
settings in the T oolpath Edit cycle.
Start the E dit toolpath cycle via the shortcut menu of the job to be edited (N ew →E dit toolpath).
hyperMILL
136
Edit toolpath: Alternatively, start the cycle via the shortcut menu of the toolpath (right-click) in the
hyperCAD-S graphics window.
Parameters dialogue page
Mode
Edit job: Delete certain sections in calculated toolpaths using a boundary and link the remaining parts of
the toolpath together. All linking paths and approach and retract macros are checked for collisions.
The Edit job function is available for the following cycles:
• 3 D Milling / 3 D Advanced Milling: All cycles except for 3D Arbitrary Stock Roughing and 3D Form
Pocket.
• 5 X Cavity Milling: All cycles except for 3D Z Level Roughing and 3D Cutting Edge Machining.
Split job: Split a toolpath on the basis of the tool life in order to exchange the tool or the inserts. The
toolpath is split either based on time or based on length.
The Split job function is available for the following cycles:
• 3 D Milling: 3D Arbitrary Stock Roughing, 3D Optimised Roughing, 3D Profile Finishing, 3D Z Level
Finishing, 3D Z Level Shape Finishing, 3D Iso Machining, 3D Plane Machining.
• 3 D Advanced Milling: 3D Complete Finishing, 3D Equidistant Finishing, 3D Automatic Rest Machin-
ing, 3D Rework Machining.
• 5 X Cavity Milling: 5X Optimised Rest Roughing, 5X Z Level Finishing, 5X Profile Finishing, 5X
Equidistant Finishing, 5X Rest Machining, 5X Rework Machining, 5X Z level Roughing.
Conditions
Use min. dist. G0: Unnecessary rapid link movements are avoided. If they fall below the specified value,
toolpaths at the defined boundary are linked with the machining feedrate. This enhances process safety
and reduces machine running time.
Connect smooth: This option smoothly connects toolpaths that run close to one another.
(1) Function not enabled, (2) Function enabled.
For further information, see section NC parameters (page 770) .
For information on the retract mode and clearance, see sections Retract mode (page 759) and Clear-
ance (page 432) .
hyperMILL
137

Split job
Time: Enable this option to split the toolpath based on time. Define the T ool life (min).
Length: Enable this option to split the toolpath based on length. Define the T ool life in millimetres (inch).
Example: (1) Machining: 3D Profile Finishing cycle, X axis, Zigzag direct infeed strategy
(2) Split job according to length, tool life = 51 mm, tolerance factor = 0.2
Result: Ten toolpaths
1
23
4
56
7891
000000000000
0
001
1
23
4
56
7891
000000000000
0
001
Y
Z X
Y
Z X
1 2
Change tolerance factor: Define the permissible deviation of the splitting positions (lower and upper limit)
based on the defined tool life. The calculated maximum and minimum tool life based on the tolerance
factor are displayed under M in. / M ax.. Valid values for the tolerance factor are between 0 and 1.
Example: Tool life = 3500 minutes. Tolerance factor = 0.2.
Min. tool life = 2800 minutes, max. tool life = 4200 minutes
Change mode: Define the reason for splitting the toolpath. Select C hange inserts to keep the current tool
and exchange the inserts. U se Inc. tool numbers to exchange the tool based on the defined T ool number
increment. Select F ixed tool numbers to exchange the tool based on the defined T ool number list.
Split mode: Select the method for splitting the toolpath. Select R apid move to split the toolpath before a
rapid movement. Select E nd of path to split the toolpath at the end of a machining step (for example, at the
end of a line in a zigzag pattern).
If the parameters used (tool life, tolerance factor) allow the job to be split, hyperMILL
will generate an appropriate number of toolpath files. These split machining jobs are
displayed in the hyperVIEW browser.
Boundary dialogue page
Selection mode →B oundary
The boundary is projected from the position defined in the CAD system onto the toolpaths.
hyperMILL
138
(1) Original job, (2) Toolpath edited using boundary
1 2
Selection mode →I nteractive
Start: Start the E dit toolpath dialogue to edit the toolpath interactively.
Icon Command Description
Trim by points Select
Use S elect →F irst and S elect →S econd to select the two toolpath
points that comprise the required section of the toolpath.
Use Invert selection to invert the current selection.
If the T o begin / To end option has been selected, only the F irst
toolpath point can be selected. The selection is made from the
selected point to the start/end of the toolpath.
Untrim by points
Trim by group Select
Use S elect →S elect to select a group of G1/G2/G3 toolpath points
between two G0 toolpath points.
Use Invert selection to invert the current selection.
Untrim by group
Trim by selection Modes
Select one of the available M odes. Trimming is performed from
the direction of the current view. No toolpath points are used for
trimming.
The toolpath is trimmed exactly where the selection and toolpath
intersect.
Use Invert selection to invert the current selection.
Untrim by selection
hyperMILL
139

Icon Command Description
Select window S elect a toolpath section within a rectangular selection area.
Select lasso Select a toolpath section within an area specified by a polygonal
chain.
Select circle Select a toolpath section within a circular selection area.
Modes
C. + P.: Enter the middle point and point on the circumference of
the circular selection area.
C. + R.: Enter middle point and radius.
The number of selected elements is displayed.
Select segment Select elements arranged in an arc.
Select
Center: Click the centre of the arc with the left mouse button or
snap a position or select a point.
Vertices: Click two diagonally opposite corners with the left mouse
button or snap positions or select two points to draw the selection
area.
The number of selected elements is displayed.
Trim by plane Modes
Select one of the available M odes. No toolpath points are used for
trimming. The toolpath is trimmed exactly where the selection and
toolpath intersect.
Entity Type: Select a plane element (plane curve, plane surface,
workplane).
3 Points: Select three non-collinear points.
Direction + Origin: Select a D irection. Then select an O rigin. A
preview of the plane is displayed perpendicular to the direction and
to the origin.
Direction
Select the reference direction using an element, via 2 Points or by
selecting an axial direction of the current (X Wp, Y Wp, Z Wp).
Origin
The origin is initialised at the first selected point.
hyperMILL
140
Icon Command Description
Untrim by plane
Select a point in the graphics area for the origin of the plane, enter
a coordinate C oord. or selectW p 0 0 0 for the origin of the current
workplane.
Use Invert selection to invert the current selection.
Trim by curves Select
Use Select →C urves to select a closed curved line.
Direction
Select the direction using an element, via 2 Points, the current view
or specify by selecting an axial direction of the current workplane (X
Wp, Y Wp, Z Wp).
Use Invert selection to invert the current selection.
Untrim by curves
Invert selection Invert the current selection.
Untrim all Undo all trims.
Simulate machining
Machining can be simulated as follows.
1. Using the internal simulation. See the information in section Internal simulation (page 142) .
2. Using the internal machine simulation. See the information in section Internal machine simulation
(page 143).
3. With the Simulation Center. See the information in section Simulation Center (page 152) .
4. Using the hyperVIEW program. See the information in section Simulation in hyperVIEW (page
152).
5. With the hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center. See the information in the hyperMILL VIRTUAL
Machining Center documentation.
6. Using an external simulation program (for example, VERICUT). See the information in section
External simulation (page 180) .
OPEN MIND recommends the use of an NC code-based simulation such as the hy-
perMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center or an external simulation program to ensure the
greatest possible degree of safety and collision protection.
To run an NC code-based simulation, an appropriate hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining
Center licence is required. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner.
The internal simulation, internal machine simulation, the Simulation Center and the
simulation with hyperVIEW arenot based on an NC file.
hyperMILL
141

Internal simulation
The internal simulation is based on the calculated toolpaths. It is n ot an NC code-based
simulation.
To start the internal simulation, select the required job list or required job and select the I nternal simulation
option from the shortcut menu.
Job status: This indicates the job that is currently being simulated.
Frame: Shows the frame of the simulated job.
Tool/Origin: Shows the tool and origin of the simulated job.
Speed: Set the simulation speed using 50 steps.
Tool: Configure the tool display.
Display the tool holder (enabled by default).
Display a freely defined tool geometry (enabled by default).
Generate an image of the tool at the current position. To delete the image, use the
shortcut menu.
Start the toolpath viewer. The toolpath viewer displays the complete toolpath in G0/G1
steps. Each entry corresponds to one toolpath step. Z levels and macro movements are
displayed separately. This means that you can locate and analyse the individual tool
movements very accurately. To address a position of the tool directly, double-click the
respective row.
Open the dialogue to define the stop conditions.
Stop at job change: If you simulate several jobs of a joblist, the simulation stops at each job change.
Simulation control
Simulation to beginning of first job
Start reverse simulation
Step back
hyperMILL
142
Start simulation
Stop simulation
Step forward
Simulation to end of last job
Set tool to selected point
Technology: Displays G0 movements and feedrates as well as spindle speed and coolant information.
Axis coordinates: Displays the coordinates of the linear and rotation axes.
Frame: Displays the axis coordinates in relation to the current job frame. If the option is not selected, the
display of the axis coordinates will refer to the NCS.
Display toolpaths / H ide toolpaths: This function (right-click the top of the dialogue) is used to show or hide
the toolpaths during the simulation.
Internal machine simulation
The internal machine simulation is based on the calculated toolpaths. It is n ot an NC
code-based simulation. The S pindle and T able elements of the machine model can be
included in the collision check.
To start the internal machine simulation, select the required job list or required job and select the I nternal
machine simulation option from the shortcut menu.
Control simulation
Start the toolpath viewer.
Open the dialogue to define the stop conditions.
Stop at tool change: the simulation stops if a tool change occurs.
Stop at collision: the simulation stops if a collision is detected. The options activated in the S etup
collision check dialogue will be considered.
hyperMILL
143

Stop the simulation at the first collision found. If the S top at collision function is enabled
and the c ollision check is switched on, the simulation will stop as soon as the first collision
is detected. The tool and/or machine components that are in collision are displayed in red,
as is the simulation control button.
Simulation to end of last job. Click the button to display the R esults of collision check
dialogue. The elements in collision and the position of a collision point are shown.
Use the S elect position function to move the machine to the selected collision point.
The Results of collision check dialogue is also displayed if no collision was detected.
If the S top at collision function is not enabled and the c ollision check is switched on, the
simulation will not stop at the first collision found, however, the components of the tool in
collision will still be coloured red during the collision. The M achining simulation dialogue is
extended by the C ollision detected entry in the lower area of the dialogue. The number of
identified collisions is displayed.
Click the icon to open the R esults of collision check dialogue with an exact display of the
respective collision points.
Stop at end of machine limit: The simulation stops when the machine limit is reached.
Stop at M0: The simulation stops in the case of a program halt.
Start the toolpath viewer.
Open the dialogue to define the stop conditions.
Stop at tool change: the simulation stops if a tool change occurs.
Stop at collision: the simulation stops if a collision is detected. The options activated in the S etup collision
check dialogue will be considered.
Stop the simulation at the first collision found. If the S top at collision function is enabled and the c ollision
check is switched on, the simulation will stop as soon as the first collision is detected. The tool and/or
machine components that are in collision are displayed in red, as is the simulation control button.
Simulation to end of last job. Click the button to display the R esults of collision check dialogue. The
elements in collision and the position of a collision point are shown.
Use the S elect position function to move the machine to the selected collision point.
The Results of collision check dialogue is also displayed if no collision was detected.
If the S top at collision function is not enabled and the c ollision check is switched on, the simulation will not
stop at the first collision found, however, the components of the tool in collision will still be coloured red
during the collision. The M achining simulation dialogue is extended by the C ollision detected entry in the
lower area of the dialogue. The number of identified collisions is displayed.
Click the icon to open the R esults of collision check dialogue with an exact display of the respective
collision points.
Stop at end of machine limit: The simulation stops when the machine limit is reached.
Stop at M0: The simulation stops in the case of a program halt.
hyperMILL
144
Stop at line Number.: The simulation stops as soon as the specified line number (see Toolpath-Viewer) is
reached.
Axis coordinates
The coordinates are displayed in relation to the NCS of the job list. If the F rame option is selected, the
coordinates at the point of contact of the tool (X, Y, Z) are displayed in relation to the job frame. The angles
of the A and C axes of the machine model used are displayed.
When machines with 6 axes (3 of which are rotary axes) are used, the B axis is aligned according to the
frame defined under the following conditions:
• Frame and NCS are turned to each other
• Several orientations are possible for the rotation axes (B axis) without angle limit
• In the postprocessor configuration, the infiniteAxisFollowsFrame parameter (type: integer) is set to
1.
Simulate material removal
The material removal simulation is used to simulate complete material removal for the machining step (job)
in question, based on the currently calculated or assigned stock.
Start the material removal simulation. In this procedure, hyperMILL analyses whether a previous calcu-
lation has generated a resulting stock model and uses this as the starting stock model. If no stock model
is present for one or more previous calculations, the S tock calculation dialogue will appear first before the
removable material simulation begins.
In the S etup area, first define the S tock and the T olerance to be used in the material removal simulation.
Activate the F ast stock calculation option if you want to accelerate the stock generation.
Please note that models generated in this way do not show a realistic display of the milling results. This
option should therefore be preferentially used with large models for which stockmodel generation would
otherwise take a very long time.
This option is not recommended when machining prismatic components (2.5D Machining).
Furthermore, you can define in the J obs to calculate section, for all jobs for which no resulting stockmodel
was calculated, whether these should be calculated prior to the stock removal simulation and then used as
the starting stockmodel. To do so, activate the corresponding job in the list of displayed jobs.
Show the model defined in the joblist.
Show the defined fixture.
Create a cut through the stockmodel at the current tool position.
Open the R estmaterial display dialogue.
Open the M easure dialogue.
Decouple the simulation window and graphics window of the CAD system or dock the
simulation window to the graphics window of the CAD system.
hyperMILL
145

The Restmaterial display function can be used to display the remaining rest material after machining.
Select the required job from the job list and select U tilities →R estmaterial display from the shortcut menu.
Then, in the S tock calculation dialogue, define which stock model should be used for rest material display.
The resulting model will be displayed and the R est material display dialogue will appear after the calcula-
tion has been carried out. Specify the parameters to display the rest material here.
The rest material analysis is also available in the I nternal machine simulation!
Allowance: Allowance to be considered during rest material display.
Max. rest material: Maximum residual stock (rest material) which may be considered during rest material
display. The rest material is displayed in four steps that are defined on the basis of the value of the
maximum permissible rest material. Example: maximum rest material = 1.
First step = <0.25, second step = < 0.5, third step < 0.75, fourth step > 0.75.
Model tessellation: Accuracy of the model display ( N ormal, Fine, Very fine).
After successful calculation, the colours used in the display will be shown as a colour gradient (yellow >
green > blue) in the lower left area of the dialogue.
The defined A llowance is represented by the yellow colour and the defined M ax. rest material by the colour
blue.
Comparison tolerance: Sum of M odel and Stock tolerance ( Simulation tolerance).
Model tolerance: Accuracy of the model used.
Simulation tolerance: Accuracy of the material removal simulation.
Measure
Measuring the distance between two selection points on surfaces or of two surfaces as well as the angle
between two surfaces. To measure, left-click a location of the element that is to be measured ( M odel,
Stock, F ixture, Machine model). Follow this procedure to specify the first point. Then, left-click again to
specify the second point. The measurement results are shown as:
Info two faces
Angle (1): Angle between surface A and surface B.
Surface distance (2): Distance between the first clicked surface (here B) to the second clicked point.
Surface distance point 2 (3): Distance between the first clicked point to the second clicked point (here A).
Point distance (4): Distance between two clicked points.
5.4208
90°
 3.2055
7.1048
1 2 3 4
A
B B
A
hyperMILL
146
Detailed point distance to NCS
Point distance X/Y/Z: Point distance from the X/Y/Z axis of the defined NCS
Point distance XY: Point distance from XY level of the defined NCS
By enabling the respective measure function, the measurement results are displayed in the graphical
preview.
Show the defined stock/model/fixture.
Display the defined machine.
Display the defined stockmodel in a transparent manner.
Display the defined model in a transparent manner.
Setup machine
Change machining variant
Change the machine setup variant for 5-axis or inclined machining.
If a suitable postprocessor (with appropriate machine model) is used, the solution used is output in the NC
files.
The following applies to machines with rotary axes that do not rotate endlessly: If a
postprocessor run with a stored solution selection is carried out, no rewind is output in
the NC file.
Open the M achine structure dialogue.
Configuration
In the M achine Structure dialogue box, specify the P lane for rotation angle C axis for turning jobs.
hyperMILL
147

CZ
Y
X
If you are using a machine with cone shape interpolation in the simulation, you can use the E nable
machine cone shape interpolation option to ensure that this type of interpolation is also used in the
simulation.
The tool will move between its start and end orientation along a cone shaped surface in the case of vector
jumps (pole pass). For machines with rotary table attachments, the tool position can also be reached by
turning the attachment.
You can also use this dialogue to define which machine components ( S pindle, T able, B ody) should be
displayed during the simulation.
If you use a machine model that contains a variable counterholder (tailstock), you can move the clamping
position either manually or automatically (option: A utomatic adjust) along 3 axes. With automatic position-
ing, the fixture is always placed at the defined stock model. The machine model must be adjusted before
you can use the function.
Open the S etup collision check dialogue
Enable checks
Specify which elements (Tool, Holder, Model) are checked during the simulation. Collision checks against
the clamping part are also available for turning jobs. When simulating turning jobs, the fixture is rotated
automatically and displayed as a transparent solid.
hyperMILL
148
Tool against model: If this option is selected, only the non-cutting part of the tool will be
considered. This is defined using the Cutting length parameter of the tool. If the Cutting
length has the value 0, it will be assumed that the entire tool cuts.
The correct definition of the cutting length can lead to significant performance increases during the stock
removal simulation of 5X machinings.
Enable stock checks
Tool head and holder, as well as non-cutting area of tool, can be checked for collisions with the stock.
If you select the G0 stock collision option, all tool components will be checked for collisions in rapid
machining mode. This function is only available for milling jobs.
Collision model
Tolerance: Surface accuracy of the milling area to be used for the collision check.
Head offset/Fixture: Allowance taken into account for the collision check.
Options
Check always non cutting area: This option is enabled by default. In the material removal simulation, the
respective tool components are displayed in different colours, as shown in the figures: (1) Non-cutting
area, (2) Tool cutting edge. In the event of a collision with the non-cutting area (Tool length - Cutting
length), this will be displayed in red during the material removal simulation.
hyperMILL
149

1
2
During simulation of a job without a machine model, the collision check is carried out for the tool holder
only. The tool shank and the spindle can only be checked for collisions during calculation of the toolpath
file (see Setup &gt; Check tool tab).
Open the S etup simulation dialogue.
Setup
Simulation tolerance: Precision of calculation of elements used in the simulation.
Tool mode: By default, the tool that was used to create the toolpath file (tool from toolpath file) is used for
the simulation.
You can, however, change the tool definition (without recalculating the toolpath file) and use the changed
tool in the simulation ( T ool from job). To do this, click the Tool line and change the required tool
parameters (for example, tool length). Then choose the T ool from job option for the tool mode.
If you want to use any tool from the list of all tools already defined for the model in the simulation, select
the Tool from tool list option. Then select the desired tool from the list under Tool.
Tool: The tool used in the job is displayed and can be edited.
Click the icon to open the tool database.
Replacing the tool in the machine simulation is intended for analysis purposes only. The
job must then be recalculated in order to generate a valid toolpath file.
Setup point mode
Automatic centre: the CAD model is automatically placed at the centre of the machine table.
Manual: specify the setup point for the model.
To do this, click the S etup point line and select the required point directly in the graphics window (icon
1) or enter the coordinate values. Click icon 2 to open the Point attribute dialogue in order to change the
orientation and define an allowance.
hyperMILL
150
Display toolpaths: The current toolpath is shown or hidden.
Fix machine: Fix the machine. The model is moved during the simulation.
Simulate only NC jobs: Activate only to simulate jobs for which an NC file has been previously created.
Colour
Define the colours for elements that are displayed in the material removal simulation (model, fixture,
stockmodel), for the display background, detected collisions and the current cut.
Job colours
Use job colours: the material removal is shown in the colour displayed for the respective job. If the function
is not enabled, the material removal is displayed in the colour specified under C urrent cut colour.
Model / Stock / Tool / Fixture / Machine
Enable the corresponding option to display the elements transparently. The transparency may be freely
specified. The edges can also be displayed. For models and fixtures, it is also possible to transfer the
original colours, which will overwrite the settings in the Colour section.
Allow to adjust tool length: The tool is displayed shortened or extended when the C alculate length function
is enabled.
Display rendered: The elements are displayed in an optimised and more realistic manner.
Shows the machine defined in the job list and/or Setup machine dialogue during the simulation.
Switches the collision check on. The elements activated in the Setup collision check dialogue are
checked. The results of the collision check are displayed in the Results of collision check dialogue.
Workspace
(1) Max. start and end points that were reached in the current simulation
(2) Defined workspace
(3) Current position of the tool
(4) Workspace violation
hyperMILL
151

Simulation in hyperVIEW
The simulation in hyperVIEW is based on the calculated toolpaths. It is n ot an NC
code-based simulation. The S pindle and T able elements of the machine model can be
included in the collision check.
Opening the program from the browser’s shortcut menu. The following data is used for simulation in
hyperVIEW: milling area, stockmodel and toolpaths.
You can transfer individual jobs in a joblist or the complete joblist to hyperVIEW.
It is not possible to call hyperVIEW from hyperMILL if a modal dialogue is waiting for
input in an opened hyperVIEW.
hyperMILL SIMULATION Center
Introduction
Use the new hyperMILL SIMULATION Center simulation solution to check machining operations quickly
and effectively for possible collisions. After the toolpath calculation, start the simulation as follows: Right-
click and then select S imulation Center on the shortcut menu of the job or job list.
The simulation takes into account the machine defined in the M achine properties →G eneral →P ostproces-
sor dialogue and is based on the calculation of the toolpaths. This is n ot an NC code-based simulation.
Linking movements between individual jobs are not simulated.
The hyperMILL VIRTUAL Machining Center software with simulation and analysis options for the NC code
after the postprocessor run is the right solution to choose if a virtual representation of the actual processes
is to be safely evaluated, controlled and optimised.
This software documentation provides information on how to use the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center
software.
User interface
The application is adapted to the use of wide screen formats and for working with multiple screens. You
can also place variable areas outside of the program window, that is, you can move them to another
screen. When you exit a document the last window positions are saved.
The user interface consists of the following elements:
hyperMILL
152
4
5
1 2
 3
6
SIMULATION Center
The title bar1provides information about the name of the currently opened document. The F 11 key hides
the title bar.
Software functions can be accessed via the m enu bar2. It is static and cannot be changed.
Brief information: Brief information on functions at positions where the mouse pointer lingers or on entries
required within a function – on the right in the menu bar 3.
The graphics area is used to display the machine, the part, the stock and other elements 4.
hyperMILL SIMULATION Center dialogue: The dialogue for operating the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center
5.
Progress indicator: Displays the progress for computing-intensive processes, 6and information is provi-
ded on the current action within the process (if possible).
hyperMILL SIMULATION Center dialogue
Use the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center dialogue to check machining operations quickly and effectively
for possible collisions.
The dialogue consists of the following sections:
hyperMILL
153

hyperMILL SIMULATION Center
2
1
4
3
x
5
3
The1toolbar is used to select the operating
modes of the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center.
The secondary navigation toolbar2controls the
content of the display area 3in the different
operating modes.
The content of the display area 3depends on
the operating mode.
• P rogram run (simulation) operating mode:
Block display, display of toolpath file and
coordinate values.
• P roject administration operating mode:
Display of main programs and subpro-
grams.
• M achine configuration operating mode:
Display of machine structure and toolbars
for configuring the display in the graphics
area.
• hyperMILL SIMULATION Center configu-
ration operating mode: Display of the ori-
gin table and tool table.
• A nalysis operating mode: Graphical dis-
play of the movement paths of the ma-
chine axes and list of breakpoints.
Use the program run control panel 4to set the speed for fast travel movements and feedrate, define the
start and end point of the program run and set positions and approach them with the machine.
5Reduce the view of the controls and restore the original view.
Reduce the control element view so that the graphics area takes up most of the screen.
Only the most important control elements are available: start and stop the program run,
manually move the machine one step forwards or backwards, start the collision check and
simulate the removal of material.
Reset the original view. The direction of the arrow depends on the position of the docked
window (left/right side of the monitor).
hyperMILL
154
TWO-WINDOW MODE
To optimally use the simulation and analysis functions of the hyperMILL SIMULATION
Center dialogue, the P rogram run (simulation) operating mode can also be executed in
a second window. At the same time, for example, the axis movements can be analysed
in the first window in the A nalysis operating mode. This configuration can also be run on
two monitors. To activate the configuration, proceed as follows:
• Right-click and select M achining simulation and Machining simulation 2 or
• right-click and select T oolpath preview and T oolpath preview 2 (if the T oolpath
preview function was previously started in hyperMILL).
The configuration is shown in figureBof the following overview.
Configuration of the machining simulation / toolpath preview
1
A: All operating modes are available in the M a-
chining simulation / Toolpath preview1window:
Program run (simulation), Project administra-
tion, Machine configuration, VIRTUAL Machining
Center configuration and Analysis.
The functions c annot be used simultaneously.
12
B: In the M achining simulation 2 / Toolpath pre-
view 22window, all functions of the P rogram
run (simulation) operating mode are available.
In the M achining simulation /Toolpath preview1
window, the functions of theP roject administra-
tion, Machine configuration, VIRTUAL Machin-
ing Center configuration and Analysis operating
modes are available.
The functions of M achining simulation 2 / Tool-
path preview 2 and Machining simulation / Tool-
path preview can be u sed simultaneously.
2
C: In the M achining simulation 22window, on-
ly the P rogram run (simulation) operating mode
is available.
Operating modes
Use the main navigation toolbar to switch between the various operating modes: Project administration,
Program run (simulation), Machine configuration, VIRTUAL Machining Center configuration and Analysis.
hyperMILL
155

Project administration operating mode
For extensive programs, load one of several available main programs. If the project con-
tains only one main program, this is loaded automatically.
Program run (Simulation) operating mode
Simulate the toolpath file. Display the control elements for regulating the speed, the block
display and the coordinate values. Control the display of the tool, part, stock and fixture.
Machine configuration operating mode
Control the display of the machine elements. Position the machine axes manually (manual
control). View the axis limits of the machine.
hyperMILL SIMULATION Center configuration operating mode
Set the minimum feedrate for the rapid traverse, configure the toolpath display, display the
tool reference point and coordinate systems of the machine used.
Analysis operating mode
Perform a graphical analysis of the movement paths of the machine axes, define break-
points and conditions for breakpoints, display breakpoints as a list and display breakpoint
coordinates.
Project administration
In Project administration operating mode, display the main programs (VNC files), manage stock, move the
setup, define collision check options and perform a collision check.
Manage project: List of all main programs, tool change jobs and operations.
The main program has not yet been checked for collisions.
Following a successful collision check, the main program is marked as follows:
Collisions occurred.
!Contacts occurred.
No collisions occurred.
Manage stock: The used stock, part and clamp are displayed in a list.
Click the A dd a stock button to select stock in*.hmc,*.omx,*.stlor*.visformat and
load in the graphics area.
Click the D elete entry button to delete the displayed stock. Material removal simulation is
only available when stock is used for the simulation.
Move setup: To move the toolpath, stock, part and fixture, make a coordinate value editable
by double-clicking and adjust as required. Confirm your input by clicking O K .
Collision check: Start the collision check and analyse all programs for possible collisions.
hyperMILL
156
Collision check options. Specify which components are checked during the collision check.
Manage project
Manage main programs, tool change jobs and operations in a project.
Main programms
T383 3D Profile Finishing_3
T241 Contour Milling on 3D Model_4
T241 Contour Milling on 3D Model_5
T999 3D Rework Machining_6
T999 5X Rework Machining_7
Operation 1, 1: T241 Pocket Milling
Tool 241, OM_MOLDCAV_16
T241 Pocket milling_1
Simulate complete NC list Stop at the end of a programm
Load this programm
2
Operation 2, 2: T241 Pocket Milling
Tool 241, OM_MOLDCAV_16
T241 Pocket Milling_2
This job only
Run to start of job
Show postprocessor log
1Main program: Program created by the postprocessor. In S ingle mode, based on an individual hy-
perMILL job. When transferring a job list, compound or linking job with several jobs, a main program is
created for each job in the job list (linking job/compound job). In Package mode, the complete job list
(linking job/compound job) is converted to a main program.
2Tool change job: position for tool change. Part of each main program.
4To simulate a loaded, active main program. All other main programs are greyed out.
5Selected entry in the NC list.
This job only: entry in the shortcut menu of main program, tool change job or operation. Limit the program
run to the selected job and the display of the toolpath. All unselected jobs in the list are greyed out. The
start and end points in the program run are adapted synchronously for the list display. If you move the start
and end points manually, the respective jobs will also be displayed ‘normally’ in the project administration
while all other jobs are greyed out.
Run to start of job: entry in the shortcut menu of main program, tool change job or operation. Move the
simulation to the beginning of the selected job.
hyperMILL
157

Load this program: entry in the shortcut menu of the main program. Load the main program for the
program run. The main program is then active. Only one main program may be active at once.
Show postprocessor log: entry in the shortcut menu of main program, tool change job or operation. Display
the postprocessor messages for this job in a text editor. The information can be saved as a text file (.txt).
Simulate complete NC list: Starting with the main program selected in the list (active), all main programs
are simulated in sequence.
Stop at the end of a program: The simulation stops after every main program.
Move setup
Move the setup (P art / Stock / Clamp) on the machine.
10
Move part
Move stock
Move fixture
clamping position with respect to
Move Setup
X
Y
Z
Table reference
-0.0075
0.0098
149.9491
Origin table reference
Table reference
1000
100
1Select the reference for moving the clamp. 2Machine axis that is moved using the 4buttons.
Double-click a coordinate value to make it editable and adapt as required. Click O K to confirm.3Show
the scale for setting the step size. Select the required option to set the coordinate values of the machine
axes.5Restore the original setup position.
Move part, Move stock, Move fixture: Select the elements to be moved.
Program run (simulation)
In the Program run (simulation) operating mode, simulate the VNC program file or NC program file. Display
the control elements for regulating the speed and configuring the block display. Configure and switch on
the collision check. Enable the material removal simulation.
Configuring the program run: Configure the view in the split/unsplit window of the
block display. The following displays are possible for the upper/lower window: VNC
program file, NC program file, coordinate values, status messages (warnings, error
messages, collision areas), no display (empty).
hyperMILL
158
Controlling visibility in the graphics area: Show or hide elements in the graphics
area.
Simulate the toolpath file: Set the start and end of the program run, approach a
position with the machine and analyse, start and stop the simulation, move the ma-
chine axes one step at a time and regulate the speed for G0 and G1 movements.
Collision check and material removal: Control the collision check and activate the
stock removal simulation.
Configuring the program run
Configure the view in the split/unsplit window of the block display. The following displays are possible
for the upper/lower window: VNC program file, NC program file, coordinate values, status messages
(warnings, error messages, collision areas), no display (empty).
Block display (VNC program file) and coordinate values
VNC: 3D Machining_02 Time:
MachineNC Delta
X
Y
Axis
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
G01 X127.642 Y138.644 ;
G01 X133.219 Y139.157 ;
1Program executed.
hyperMILL
159

2Duration of the simulation. Position the mouse pointer over the displayed time to display the values for
G0, G1 and G2/G3 movements.
3Current position of the machine (corresponds to the display in the coordinates overview).
4Block to be executed next.
5Breakpoint: Double-click the block display to set a breakpoint for the current position. Double-click once
more to delete the breakpoint.
6Search position: Click the block display (right mouse button) and use the S earch shortcut menu to enter
a search string (coordinates, control commands).
7Coordinates overview. N C: Coordinates of the NC file. M achine: Coordinates of the machine axes. Dif-
ferences resulting from tool length compensation or enabled RTCP are visible. D elta: Difference between
current position of the machine axes and position of the block to be approached next (highlighted in
green).
Information on the following is displayed underneath the block display: tool number 8, part origin 9,
RTCP1 0, coolant1 1, spindle speed and orientation1 2and feedrate1 3.
Controlling visibility in the graphics area
Show or hide elements in the graphics area.
Show or hide the toolpath.
Show or hide the tool.
Show or hide the model.
Show or hide the stock.
Show or hide the clamp.
Show or hide the machine.
hyperMILL
160
Displaying elements in transparent mode
Display machine components, stock, removed stock, part, clamp and tool in various modes.
1Standard mode,2semi-transparent,3transparent.
Select an element with the left mouse button and double-click to make it semi-transparent.
Press CTRL and double-click to make the element transparent.
1 2 3
The part and clamp cannot be displayed separately in a different mode.
Simulating the toolpath file
Set the start and end of the program run, approach a position with the machine and analyse, start and
stop the simulation, move the machine axes one step at a time and regulate the speed for G0 and G1
movements.
Setting the simulation area – approach a position
hyperMILL
161

Set the start1and end2of the program run by selecting the lower and upper limits. For this purpose,
pick the required start and end points for the program run on the toolpath. You can also define the start
and end points directly using the two slide controls AandB.
3Reset the limits for the program run.
4Move the machine to the start of the simulation area.
5Approach the current position again, see6.
6Pick a new position by defining a toolpath point and move the machine to this point.
Starting and stopping the program run – regulate the speed
10001000
0.85 8.5
7Move the program run one step backwards.
8Start and stop the program run.
9Move the program run one step forwards.
1 0Set the speed for rapids (G0 movements).
1 1Set the speed for the normal feedrate (G1/2/3 movements).
The speed control refers to a path unit. Minimum = 0.01 mm, Maximum = 100 mm. If necessary, interpo-
lation is carried out between the individual blocks to provide a tool movement that is as uniform and
consistent as possible. If the increment is not smooth enough, blocks may also be omitted. The increment
has no influence on the collision check and material removal simulation.
Double-click one of the two speed controllers to switch the program run to whole blocks, independent of
the speed, (the speed controllers are then greyed out). This always applies both to G0 and G1 movements
as well as to moving forwards and backwards one step at a time. Double-click one of the two speed
controllers again to restore the original behaviour.
Keyboard shortcuts
CTRL+ F : Perform a full-text search when the input focus is on the VNC/NC code display. To do so, click
the display window with the right/left mouse button.
Back/Forward key: Move the program run forwards or backwards one step at a time when the input focus
is on the simulation control. To do so, click the simulation control elements with the right or left mouse
button.
Collision check and material removal
Change the search direction of the quick navigation for finding warnings, collisions or
breakpoints:
Forward1, Backward2.
hyperMILL
162
Move the machine to the next warning.
Move the machine to the next collision area.
Move the machine to the next breakpoint.
Start the collision check. Analyse the loaded program for possible collisions. If a collision
is detected, the collision area is highlighted (red) in the program file. The NC file is not
approved.
A collision check can be performed in the P roject administration and P rogram run (simula-
tion) operating modes.
Collision check options. Specify which components are checked during the collision check.
Simulate the removal of material in the program run.
A collision check must be carried out.
Collisions occurred during the simulation.
! Contacts occurred during the simulation.
No collisions occurred during the simulation.
A simulation only takes place up to the safety position of the machine. A t ool change is
not simulated.
Collision check options
Use the following options to control the collision check.
The tolerance values/limit values for the still permissible contact of the tool with the
component/stock must be in reasonable proportion to the size of the tool used. OPEN
MIND recommends defining these values no larger than half the tool diameter.
hyperMILL
163

Check tool against model: Checks the tool against the model.
Check holder/shaft/core against model: Holder, shank and tool core are checked against the model.
Always check G0: The rapid traverse check is activated by default. If the C heck tool against model function
is deactivated, the check for all fast travel movements can also be optionally switched off. This can make it
easier to release an NC file in certain situations (for example, when machining non-modelled areas).
Check stock: Checks tool and holder against the stock.
Remove detached stock: Only available if C heck stock is enabled. If this function is activated, a check is
performed during the collision check and the simulation to see whether there is a stock area that has no
contact with the defined milling area (model). If this is the case, the stock is automatically removed during
the simulation and the collision check.
Consider core diameter for milling tools: The tool tip is checked for collisions with the stock, taking the core
diameter into account.
Limits for component contact
Use G0 tip limit / G1 tip limit to set the limit value for the still permitted contact of the tool tip with the model
in G0 and G1 movements. If a larger value is detected during the test, a message is generated.
Part allowance
Use part allowance: Activate if a part allowance should be defined for the collision check. The part
allowance is then defined either using the settings in the job (if the U se job settings option has been
activated) or it can be entered directly under A llowance. The tool shape is offset in all directions by the
entered value. If -0.01 is entered, a ball mill D10 becomes a ball mill D9.98 during the collision check.
Use job settings: Enabled by default. The values defined in the job for allowance, allowance XY and
allowance Z are used for the collision check.
A check is also performed to see whether a negative allowance or the C hamfer height
parameter is defined for theC hamfer Milling on 3D Model cycle. As a component viola-
tion is desired here, n o collision message is output in these cases.
If the U se job settings option has not been activated, the value for the A llowance can be entered directly.
The value that is entered is offset on the shank diameter. If -0.01 is entered, the diameter of the shank is
reduced by 0.02 (shank radius -0.01).
Only tip: The allowance is only applied to the tool tip (to be activated if, for example, only a small area at
the bottom of a cavity is to be machined with a negative allowance).
Whole tool: The stock allowance is applied to the entire tool (including thickened shank and holder) (to
be activated if, for example, a complete steep area is to be machined from top to bottom with a negative
allowance).
Stock contact
allow thin shank contact: Activate to use a tool where the shank and cutting edge have been defined
with the same diameter. The tool shank may touch the stock. No collision message is output. Use with
imprecisely defined tool geometry.
derive from stock model resolution: Activate to use a tool where the shank and cutting edge have been
defined with the same diameter. Situations in which there is a distance of 0 between the stock and shank
are not regarded as a collision. The tolerance required for the collision check is automatically derived from
the stock tolerance if the function is activated.
If the function is not activated, the value for the tolerance can be entered directly. The value that is entered
is offset on the shank diameter. If -0.01 is entered, the diameter of the shank is reduced by 0.02 (shank
radius -0.01).
hyperMILL
164
Part contact
allow thin shank contact: Activate to use a tool where the shank and cutting edge have been defined with
the same diameter. The tool shank may touch the component. No collision message is output. Use with
imprecisely defined tool geometry.
derive from job settings: Activate to use a tool where the shank and cutting edge have been defined with
the same diameter. Situations in which there is a distance of 0 between the component and shank are
not regarded as a collision. The tolerance required for the collision check is automatically derived from the
calculation tolerance in the hyperMILL job if the function is activated.
If the function is not activated, the value for the tolerance can be entered directly. The value that is entered
is offset on the shank diameter. If -0.01 is entered, the diameter of the shank is reduced by 0.02 (shank
radius -0.01).
Tool safety distance to fixture
Safety distance to be maintained between the tool and the fixture (exception: touch probe).
Use hyperMILL settings: Use the settings from hyperMILL.
Further collision check options
Resolution: Set the accuracy for the collision check.
Stop on first collision: During the collision check, the program stops at the first collision found.
Information in the display area
The following example shows information from the display area that is available during the simulation or
after the collision check has been performed.
• The upper window of the display area shows the s tatus messagesA, separated according to the
following areas: C ollisions, G ouge, C ontacts, E rrors and W arnings. The dialogue tabs C ollisions,
Gouge and C ontacts list the program lines in which a collision, a component violation or a contact
was detected. The dialogue tabs E rror and W arnings display status messages that refer to the
simulation of the VNC or NC program file.
• The lower window of the display area shows the b lock displayB.
hyperMILL
165

Lines 79-79: Collision between
Shaft, Tip, Part
5X Swarf Cutting one Curve
Lines 54-54: Collision between
0 Gouges Errors Warnings
Shaft, Part
Tip, Part
0 Contacts
Save
Show details
Move to this line
Lines 90-90: Collision between
Lines 42-44: Collision between
Lines 42-43: Collision between
Lines 44-44: Collision between
Tool holder, Stock
Shaft, Part
Tip, Part
Part_complete.nc
5X Swarf Cutting one Curve
Collisions
Search
Run to this position
Run to line
Set start of simulation
This job only
Run to previous tool change job
Find next
Erase search marker
Save current stock
Run to next tool change job
Run to start of previous job
Set end of simulation
Run to start of job
Switch rest material display on/off
Status messages
A status message is output, among other things:
• if a component is in collision,
• an axis is outside of the permissible limits,
• an NC block cannot be interpolated reliably and can therefore not be checked for collisions (for
example, in 180° rotations),
• a transformation is to be carried out that is not possible with the machine kinematics used.
As only the axis positions at the start and end point of a block are checked when a
VNC program file is read, a collision check must be performed in order to also display
workspace violations that arise due to the fact that an axis is located between the start
and end point of a block outside of the permissible workspace.
1Collision between Shaft, Tip and Part (*).
hyperMILL
166
(*) The names of the components listed in the status messages depend on the names
used in the machine model.
The following functions are available via the shortcut menu of the status messages (right mouse button):
2Save Save information about the program lines with collisions to a text file.
3Move to this line Position the simulation at the beginning of the collision area. In the block display, the
respective blocks are shown in red, as is the component that is in collision in the program run.
4Show details Display more detailed information about the components that are in collision.
Block display
Highlighted in yellow: The machine axes are out of limit: Z. Position the mouse pointer over the highlighting
to display the warning.
Highlighted in red: A machine component is in collision with the part or stock.
The following functions are available via the shortcut menu of the block display (right mouse button):
5Run to this position: Move the tool to the selected position.
6Run to line: Move the tool to the position that has been entered.
7Set start of simulation / Set end of simulation: Set the selected position as the start point or end point for
the simulation.
8This job only: Limit the program run and the toolpath display to the selected job. All unselected jobs in
the list are greyed out. The start and end points in the program run are adapted synchronously for the list
display. If you move the start and end points manually, the respective jobs will also be displayed ‘normally’
in the project administration while all other jobs are greyed out.
9Run to start of job / R un to start of previous job: Move the simulation to the beginning of the selected or
previous job.
1 0Run to next tool change job / R un to previous tool change job: Move the simulation to the beginning of
the next or previous tool change job.
1 1Search: Search for coordinates or control commands in the VNC or NC program file by entering a
search string. The search position that is found is highlighted in the program file. F ind next Find the next
block that contains the search string. E rase search marker: Delete a search marker in the VNC or NC
program file.
1 2Save current stock: Save the current stock in*.xformat.
1 3Text shown in red in the block display: This is an internal error. This may be a
message from the postprocessor, for example. Please contact OPEN MIND Support.
1 4Switch rest material display on / S witch rest material display off: Switch the rest material display on or
off.
hyperMILL
167

Machine configuration
In the Machine configuration operating mode, display the machine elements in the form of a structure tree
and configure the display in the graphics area. Use the secondary navigation toolbar to switch between
machine configuration, manual control for manually positioning the machine axes and the display of the
machine axis limits (min./max.).
Controlling visibility in the graphics area: Control the display of the machine elements in the
graphics area, manually position the machine axes and display the limits of the machine
axes.
Position machine axes: Manually position the linear and rotary axes of the machine (X,
Y, Z, A, B, C) and test various machining situations on the part under real conditions to
determine the optimal tool length or unclamping of the tool, for example.
Limits of the machine axes: Display the limit values of the linear and rotary axes of the
machine and the movement of the machine coordinate system.
Control visibility in the graphics area
Control the display of the machine elements in the graphics area, manually position the machine axes and
display the limits of the machine axes.
Load profile Save profile
Model
Use the secondary navigation toolbar to switch 1between machine configurationA, manual controlB
and the display of the machine axis limitsC.
Use the toolbar2to configure the display of the machine in the graphics area.
Machine elements3in the form of a structure tree.
1Machine element,2machine axis,3linear axis/rotary axis
hyperMILL
168
Click an icon to change the visibility of a machine element in the tree structure.
Grey: The element is hidden. Yellow: The element is partly shown (not all sub-elements are
shown). Green: The element is completely shown.
Show all elements of the machine model.
Hide all elements of the machine model.
Show head and table of the machine.
Just show the head of the machine.
Just show the table of the machine.
hyperMILL
169

Positioning machine axes manually
Manually position the linear and rotary axes of the machine (X, Y, Z, A, B, C) and test various machining
situations on the part under real conditions to determine the optimal tool length or unclamping of the tool,
for example.
NC Machine
Solutions
Run to workplane
Solution1 A0 B0 Solution 2 A180 B180
Axis
Move along tool axis
UpdateCalculate solutions
Trans/RTCP
1Use the secondary navigation toolbar to switch between machine configuration A, manual controlB
and the display of the machine axis limitsC.
2Enter coordinate values for linear and rotary axes of the machine coordinate system (M achine) or the
NC program file (N C) directly. Values that are outside of the limits are displayed in red.
Click a button (X, Y, Z, A, B) to activate the input field (Machine/NC). Double-click the respective coordi-
nate value to make it editable and adjust in order to move the machine to the required position.
3Machine axis that is moved using the buttons 5or the slide control7for stepwise positioning (dis-
played in grey).
4Move the active axis to the lower/upper limit.
5Reduce or increase the position of the machine axes (X, Y, Z, A, B) one step at a time.
6Show the scale for setting the step size. Select the required option to set the coordinate values of the
machine axes (X, Y, Z, A, B, C).
7Move the active axis using the slide control.
8Display of coordinate values of the active axis. The value can be changed by entering another value.
hyperMILL
170
9Move the machine axes to the original position.
Move along tool axis: Move the machine along the tool axis.
If the M ove along tool axis option is selected, the step size does not refer to an axis but instead speci-
fies the movement in the direction of the tool axis. The allocation of this step size to the movements of
all tool axes is calculated automatically. The affected tool axes are displayed in grey.
1 0Trans / RTCP: Turn RTCP* (Rotation Tool Center Point) on or off.
* Term is controller-dependent. Also used: TCPM (Tool Centre Point Management), TRAORI.
Run to workplane: Move the tool or spindle (if no tool is shown) to the workplane origin. If several
traversing options are possible as a result of the machine kinematics, they can be activated as solutions.
Solutions
Calculate solutions: The possible solutions are calculated and displayed based on the machine data and
the machine configuration settings.
 = activated solution. = another solution.
Update: The data is recalculated based on the values for the displayed rotary axes.
hyperMILL
171

Limits of the machine axes
Displays the limits (Minimum/Maximum) of the linear and rotary axes of the machine and the movement of
the machine coordinate system. The values cannot be edited.
Axis Min Max
Machine coordinate system
3
2
Machine limits
X
Y
Z
A
B
X
Y
Z
-400.000
-300.000
85.000
-180.000
400.000
650.000
1105.000
65.000
360.0000.000
1Use the secondary navigation toolbar to switch between machine configuration A, manual controlB
and the display of the machine axis limitsC.
2Limits of the linear and rotary axes.
3Movement of the machine coordinate system.
Configuration
In the hyperMILL SIMULATION Center configuration operating mode, display the origin and tool table, edit
the origin table, configure the display in the graphics window and the simulation.
Origin table: Display the origin table and adjust the origins.
Tool table: Display the tool table with the used tools.
Extended settings: Configure the display in the graphics window and the simulation.
Material removal options: When material removal is activated, control the display of the
material removal in the simulation.
Origin table
Display the O rigin table with the active origin. The origins cannot be edited.
hyperMILL
172
Origin table
Origin reference
X 0.0000
0.0000
0.0000Z
Y
X Y Z B CID Active
0
1
Name
G54
0.0000
25.0000 15.0000 -20.6400
0.0000
0.0000 0.0000
0.00000.0000 0.0000
Tool table
Information on the used tools is displayed in the T ool table:
Tool table
Active
1
Register
1
2 2
NrID Name L DL DR R
Finishing cutter D8.0
Finishing cutter D6.0
120
120
4
3
0
0
0
00
0
Load a tool
23
ID, N r, R egister, A ctive, N ame, L =length, R = radius, D L = additional length compensation and D R =
additional radius compensation. The values for L and R are taken from the tool definition and the values
for DL and DR are stored in a table.
1Position the mouse pointer over the column boundary to adapt the size of a table column.
2Double-click a table row to open the hyperMILL tool dialogue and display all geometry and technology
parameters of the tool.
3The tool currently used in the simulation is marked as the active tool.
Load a tool: Load a tool file in.xmlformat.
hyperMILL
173

It is only possible to load tool files that are compatible with the neutral tool exchange
format of the tool database.
Extended settings
NC data
Show line numbers for VNC data: Displays the line numbers in the VNC program file/NC file. Both
numbers correlate, however, they are not identical with the line numbers of the NC program that is output.
Simulation
Minimum feedrate for rapid movements: G1 movements with a higher feedrate (than the defined value)
are handled as rapid tool movements. Here, the feedrate is replaced by the default feedrate for G0
movements. The toolpath is displayed in red in the program run and the display also corresponds to G0
movements.
Number of replay steps: Specify the number of steps that the machine travels in order to approach a
toolpath point again that was defined using the P ick new position function.
Simulation tolerance: Accuracy of the simulation for the collision check.
Simulate machine cycles as a single operation: Machine cycles such as Simple Drilling or Circular Pocket
can be simulated separately as a single operation.
Appearance
Visualize tool paths for linking movements: Display the toolpaths of linking jobs plus all linking movements
between the jobs contained in the linking job in the program run. They are shown as blue lines independ-
ently of the feedrate.
The V isualize tool paths for linking movements function is not available for the hy-
perMILL SIMULATION Center.
Visualize toolpath points: Define the colour and size of tool vectors.
Visualize tool vectors: Define the colour and size of tool vectors.
Visualize tool reference point: Display the reference point defined in the tool definition in the graphics area.
Tool reference point: Tip1, Middle2.
1
2
Set width of tool paths: Define the display width of the toolpaths in the graphics area.
Visualize tool path only for: To make things clearer when very complex toolpaths are present, limit the
display to an area before and after the tool reference point.
hyperMILL
174
Visualize coordinate systems
Display the coordinate systems of the following elements: M achine, P art, A ctive origin, A ctive transforma-
tion, Origin Table Reference.
Set rotation target to origin of graphics system: Set the position as the centre point for moving the view
when rotating to the origin of the graphics system.
Activate material removal if stock is present: Material removal is automatically activated if stock is present.
Use different job colours in material removal: In a machining sequence with material removal, the material
to be removed is shown in different colours.
Use job information in material removal: If this option and material removal are activated, clicking on the
model displays information on the respective job.
Material removal options
Rest material display
Use the rest material display to control the display of the material removal in the simulation. First switch on
the rest material display in the S imulation area via the shortcut menu of the block display.
Min. rest material: Minimum rest material that is taken into account in the rest material display.
Max. rest material: Maximum rest material that is taken into account in the rest material display.
Comparison tolerance: Value for the accuracy of the representation. The value corresponds to the larger
of the two values for the M achining tolerance and the S tock tolerance used in hyperMILL to calculate the
toolpaths.
The rest material is displayed in five stages. The calculation of the values for each stage is based on the
values for M in. rest material and Max. rest material.
Calculation example for the rest material values of the five stages.
Min. rest material = 0.2, Max. rest material = 1, Comparison tolerance = 0.2.
If the U se job information in material removal option is activated, clicking the model opens a dialogue with
information about the respective job. To move the simulation to the beginning of the job in question, use
the Run to start of job button.
Analysis
In the Analysis operating mode, perform a graphical analysis of the movement paths of the linear and
rotary axes, insert, activate or delete breakpoints, display a list of all breakpoints.
hyperMILL
175

Graphical analysis: Perform a graphical analysis of the movement path of the machine
axes and configure the display.
X Y Z
Display the movement path of the linear axes (X, Y, Z).
A B
Display the movement path of the rotary axes.
F S
Display the F eedrate and/or the S pindle speed.
Breakpoints: Insert breakpoints, define conditions for breakpoints, display breakpoints as a
list.
Variables: Use control-specific default settings and parameters.
hyperMILL
176
Analysing the movement path of the machine axes
Visible grid Current simulation interval only
Absolut
Zoom Zoom vertical Zoom horizontal
Delta
1Coordinates (linear axes) or degrees (rotary axes).
2Collision area (highlighted in red).
3Movement path of the Z axis,4the Y axis,5and the X axis.
6Length of the toolpath.
7Use the F and S buttons to show the feedrate and spindle speed.
8Tooltip: Position the mouse pointer over a button (X , Y , Z , A , B ) to show the minimum and maximum
value of the axis.
9Use the X , Y, Z, A, B buttons to show the graphical movement path of the linear axes and rotary axes.
hyperMILL
177

1 0Coordinate grid.
Absolute Display the coordinate values as absolute values. D elta: Show the coordinate values as the
difference between two blocks.
Zoom: Zooming (enlarging or reducing) is performed both in the horizontal direction when displaying the
coordinate values and in the vertical direction when displaying the block display.
Zoom vertical: Zooming (enlarging or reducing) is only performed in the vertical direction when displaying
the coordinate values. The representation of the block display does not change.
Zoom horizontal: Zooming (enlarging or reducing) is only performed in the horizontal direction during the
block display. The representation of the coordinate values does not change.
The information also applies to the analysis of the feedrate values and the spindle speed.
Visible grid: Show a coordinate grid in order to obtain a better overview.
Current simulation interval only: Display information for the current simulation interval.
Analysing the machine positions and travel range
1Movement path of the Z axis,2current position of the machine,
3Upper limit,4lower limit (travel range of the Z axis).
Keyboard shortcuts and mouse functions for controlling the analysis
CTRL key and right mouse button: Move the analysis window.
CTRL key and left mouse button: Set a position and move the machine to this position.
Left mouse button: Open a zoom window for zooming.
hyperMILL
178
Right mouse button/mouse wheel: Zoom out or in. Both functions are designed as a stack function: If you
zoom in three times and zoom out twice you will reach the state that existed after the first zoom in.
SHIFT key and mouse wheel/middle mouse button: After zooming out, zoom in again to a previously
selected position.
SHIFT key and right mouse button: Zoom out to the original standard view again.
Double-click (right/left mouse button): Create a new breakpoint.
Setting up and configuring breakpoints
Tool change 1
Breakpoint in line 1063
Details
Overview
Run to this position
Set start of simulation
Set end of simulation
Search
Erase search marker
Details
Disable breakpoints
Enable breakpoints
Delete breakpoints
Overview
Run to line
1Overview: List of defined breakpoints. Double-click to make a breakpoint editable and assign a name of
your choice.
2Details: Coordinate values of a breakpoint as VNC or NC program file.
3Shortcut menu on the Overview tab (list display). Select one or several breakpoints by clicking with
the left mouse button, right-click and then select the D isable breakpoint, E nable breakpoint or D elete
breakpoint function to either disable, enable or delete the breakpoint respectively (see figure 10).
4Active breakpoint,5Inactive breakpoint.
6Shortcut menu on the Details tab (coordinate values). Approach a specific breakpoint via the shortcut
menu or set as the start/end of the program run (see the figure ‘Setting up and configuring breakpoints’).
The shortcut menu is the same as the shortcut menu in the block display. This way, specific breakpoints
can be approached and they can also be set as the start and end of the program run.
hyperMILL
179

1 2
Insert a new breakpoint. Use the S top [Number] Steps before the event option to stop
the program run the required number of steps before the defined breakpoint in order
to reduce the speed if required.
1Define a condition and a T itle for a breakpoint. Either specify S top at G0 or S top
at tool change as the condition (the number of times the condition occurs in the active
program is displayed).
2Pick a breakpoint from the toolpath that is loaded.
Variables
The V ariables dialogue displays controller-specific default settings and parameters that are used in the NC
code.
Q120
Variables
Q121
Q20
Q23
Q339
x_shift
Q21
y_shift
z_shift
90
180
180
180
1
1
0
0
0
External simulation
hyperMILL currently supports the following external simulation programs:
• VERICUT
• COLLISION SAFEGUARD
• NCSIMUL SOLUTIONS
The following section contains information on activating and configuring external simu-
lation programs in hyperMILL. For information on how the simulation programs work,
please consult the product documentation supplied by the respective manufacturer.
hyperMILL
180
If you use an external simulation program, you must activate it first. Afterwards, you can specify various
settings for its use.
Please note that a licence is necessary to use the program. Please contact your OPEN MIND partner for
details.
Activate VERICUT
1. First open the A pplication settings program.
2. Click N ew under Registered applications.
3. Select the V ERICUT entry under K ey, then go to P rogram, browse to the correct folder in your
VERICUT installation and select v ericut.bat.
4. Confirm by selecting O K.
5. On the P ostprocessor tab in the job list, select the M achine option.
6.
 Click the icon to open the M achine administration dialogue.
7. Define a machine whose NC output you want to check using VERICUT.
8. Activate the required simulation in the G eneral →E xternal simulation section.
9.
 Click the icon to open the configuration dialogue.
Configure VERICUT / COLLISION SAFEGUARD
Machine
Select a machine model (file format:*.mch/*.xmhc).
Controller
Select a controller (file format:*.ctl/*.xctl).
Project
Select a project file. This is a template file in which the VERICUT start configuration is defined (including
window view, tolerances, collision checking, etc.). To change the configuration, open the project file in
VERICUT and then save your changes.
Options
Default correction list: This value will be used if it has not already been defined in hyperMILL (job definition,
Tool tab). Numerical values (integers), variables (tool numbers) and calculation options (such as T:No+10)
may be used.
Tool reference point ID: Definition of a unique tool name (with formula support). Prerequisite for a correct
tool change.
Attach to: Specify whether the components are to be placed automatically ( A utomatic option). The
VERICUT interface will then automatically search for the intended clamping position.
Position: Specify the position manually. The name of the VERICUT element at which the workpieces are
placed must be defined.
Model: Close STL specifies whether a closed solid should be created for the STL files of the model.
Option Close fixture STL creates a closed solid for the STL files of the clamping part.
Closing the files can prevent display problems in VERICUT.
Program zero: Specify whether the VERICUT interface A utomatically moves the program zero point or
whether the setting is imported from the P roject template.
This concludes the settings required to use the VERICUT interface.
hyperMILL
181

Start external simulation
Use the U tilities function on the shortcut menu of the job list or job and select the required external
simulation.
hyperMILL
182
hyperMILL additional functions
Please note that not all additional hyperMILL functions are available on all platforms. For further informa-
tion, see the tables in section hyperMILL and CAD program (page 11) .
Analysis
Start from the hyperMILL T ools →A nalysis menu or the U tilities →A nalysis shortcut menu of the job or
job list. If you start the analysis function from the shortcut menu, using the T est tool position function, both
the Frame and the T ool are taken directly from the job.
Click the icon to start the A nalysis. Further additional functions are available via their corresponding
icons. Click the respective icon and hold down the mouse button.
Analyse one/two surfaces
Display the model in transparent mode.
Frame: First, select the f rame that you want to use for the analysis. In the graphics window, now click
the surface(s) that you want to analyse. The hyperMILL plane analysis starts automatically. The dialogue
box contains different information, depending on the surface type.
You can analyse the following surface types: plane, fillet, torus, cone, free-form surface and hole.
Take analysis results
You can save the graphical feedback of the dimensions on a freely specifiable layer.
Click the icon to define the layer and enter the name to which the feedback should be saved. Then
determine the layer colour by clicking the coloured surface.
Radius analysis/plane analysis
You use radius analysis to analyse the radii of all or individual surfaces of a CAD model. You use plane
analysis to analyse a CAD model in terms of its planes.
Display the model in transparent mode
Show planes
Radius/surface information
Select the s urfaces that you want to use for the analysis.
Select the f rame that you want to use for the analysis.
The radius analysis/plane analysis starts automatically. All radii/planes found are combined into groups in
a list display.
Use M ax. / Min. radius to specify the maximum or minimum size of the radii to be recognised. You use
Max./Min. angle to specify the maximum or minimum angle of the planes to be recognized. You use the
step value to specify the increments for the size of the respective group.
If you subsequently change one of these parameters and press RETURN, hyperMILL automatically per-
forms a new calculation that takes account of the modified parameters.
Filter
You use the S how concave/convex/undercut radii options to specify which radii are recognised. In the CAD
model, each radius group/plane group is assigned a c olour (see List display, column C ) and each group
can be individually shown or hidden. To hide a radius group, deselect the check box in column V .
To show or hide all groups, right-click in the list display and select A ll on/All off. To show or hide all
selected groups, right-click in the list display and select A ll selected on/All selected off.
If you select the relevant line for a radius group or plane group in the list display, all of the radii or planes in
this group are coloured red in the CAD model.
hyperMILL
183

Write planes / radii on separate layers
You can use this function in the results list shortcut menu to save the radii / planes from the analysis on
separate layers. If you double-click an entry in the list display, the radii/surfaces combined and shown
in this group are zoomed in (individually) in the graphics window and combined into a special list (Zoom
element).
You can select the elements in this list individually or you can use the arrow keys to navigate through the
list. You can change the colour for each radius group or Surface Group in the list display by double-clicking
the relevant colour symbol in column C.
The model appears transparent. In each case, the first transparent colour set in the CAD program is
used.
The model is displayed in the default colour for the tool display (also see hyperMill settings →D ocument
→C olours →T ool).
The recognised radii are displayed in the c olours for the list display (see also hyperMILL S ettings →
Document →C olours →C olours for list display).
The model is displayed in the default colour for the tool display (also see hyperMill settings →D ocument
→C olours →T ool).
The recognised planes are displayed in the c olours for list display (see also hyperMILL S ettings →D ocu-
ment →C olours →C olours for list display).
For the r adius analysis and p lane analysis, you can save the graphical feedback concerning the displayed
parameters in a layer of your choice. For information on this procedure, see Analysing one/two surfaces.
Test tool position
You can use the T est tool position function to determine the best frame for a particular type of machining.
Setup
Click the T ool / Frame line to specify the f rame and tool.
Machine: Specify the machine model to be used for the analysis.
Show machine: Enable this function to display the machine model in the graphics window.
Configuration
Setup point mode: Use A utomatic centre to place the CAD model automatically at the centre of the
machine table. Select M anual to specify the setup point for the model.
To do this, click the S etup point line and select the required point directly in the graphics window (icon 1)
or enter the coordinate values.
Click icon 2 to open the P oint attribute dialogue in order to change the orientation and define an
allowance.
If you e nable the c ollision check option and define a m illing area, the tool is displayed in red if it is in
collision.
Tool orientation: You can align the tool at the f rame that is currently set or at the s urface normal. Use the
left mouse button to position the tool anywhere in the CAD model.
Tool inclination by mouse: You can use the graphical preview of the three axes (A, B and C) to specify
(directly at the tool) the tool inclination for each axis separately. To do this, click the relevant preview and
use the mouse to move the tool. Then click again when the tool is positioned correctly.
hyperMILL
184
Display of position (frame): Displays the current angles for the B and C axes as well as the coordinates of
the tool’s contact point ( X , Y , Z ), based on the f rame set under T ool and frame. You can either enter the
exact positioning directly in the corresponding line or control the entry using icons.
Change tool position based on the displayed coordinate system.
Change tool position based on the currently set f rame.
The accuracy is set using the increment value.
Optimise tool length: hyperMILL calculates the optimum tool length for any tool position.
Transparent: The model appears transparent. In each case, the first transparent colour set in the CAD
program is used.
Frame: hyperMILL saves the current tool position as a frame. If you use a machine that supports
serration, (see J ob list), the frame created is automatically always compatible with the respective serration.
Results tool length optimisation
The R equired tool length (including the T ool extension) as well as the calculated H older clearance are
displayed directly in the dialogue.
New tool length: Specify how you want to use the tool length optimisation results here. The following
options are available:
Change tool length: The tool used in the job is adjusted accordingly. Please also take into account the
effect on other jobs that use the same tool.
Create new tool: A new tool with a new ID is created using the data of the current tool, taking into account
the optimisation results.
Better tool from database
Searches for a more suitable tool in the database. Change the corresponding parameters in the Tool
diameter section and click the icon to perform the tool search with the changed parameters. You can
specify a tolerance range both for the Tool diameter and for the Corner radius that is taken into account
during the search.
Result
The changed/new tool is displayed in the dialogue under R esults. Click the icon to copy the tool to the
job. The tool is also saved in the OPEN MIND tool database.
Click the icon to discard the changed/new tool.
Converter – display surface errors
Display incorrectly converted surfaces.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Surface errors are displayed on the V isibility →T AGs →C onverter tab. If no surface errors are found, show
the model again by enabling the C omplementary TAG.
Remove image
Remove feedback image.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
OMX data
OMX is the internal hyperMILL geometry data format. You can transfer geometry data such as boundaries
or drilling positions from one job list to another using the E xport OMX and Import OMX additional functions.
Import OMX
Load omx-format geometry data into a model.
hyperMILL
185

Start via the hyperMILL menu T ools.
File: Specify the source file.
Colour/Layer: Define colour and layer.
Export OMX
Save selected geometry data in a separate*.omxfile.
Start via the hyperMILL menu T ools.
If you want to use this function to export a freely defined holder/spindle as a contour to the OPEN MIND
tool database, enable the D ata to clipboard option. For further information on importing a freely defined
holder or freely defined spindle, see section Create geometry with the geometry editor (page 1431) .
Contours: Select contours that you want to save in the *.omx file.
Approx. tolerance: Approximated tolerance. Default value for converting 2D contours with elliptic arcs or
splines into a set of connected lines (for profile curves or boundaries).
File: Enter the path and name of the*.omxfile you want to create.
Write data to clipboard: This function allows you to transfer geometry data directly to hyperVIEW.
Import TDM Systems tools
Exchange of data between TDM Systems and hyperMILL.
Import TDM Systems tools: Import TDM Systems tools: Import tools from the TDM Systems tool
database.
Export TDM systems tools
Export TDM systems tools:
[de]
Import WinTool tools
Exchange of data between WinTool and hyperMILL during which the tool IDs are checked. When importing
tools from WinTool, hyperMILL assigns NC numbers automatically. The next NC number is the highest
existing number + 1.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Export WinTool tools
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
hyperMILL
186
Import Zoller tools:
Exchange of data between Zoller tool management system and hyperMILL. The imported tools are auto-
matically entered in the tool list of the current document.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Export Zoller tools
Export all tools used in the document to the Zoller database. If the document contains multiple joblists, a
usage list is created for each joblist of the document.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Contour offset
To limit machining areas optimally, change the size of contours. If the contour has not been created yet,
you can also select surface edges and offset them at the same time.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Option
Tolerance: Enter the required tolerance value. This value defines:
• The maximum distances between individual elements that can be closed when joining points or
lines to curves or mesh elements.
• The minimum distances between surface edges for them to be recognised as separate contours.
Colour: The colour of the newly created contour.
Layer: Layer on which the newly created contour is stored.
Selection
Contours: Select contours that you want to edit. For information on selecting contours, see section Se-
lecting elements in the CAD system (page 26) .
Allowance
Value: Distance of the new contour from the original contour.
Increment: The value defined here is added to (or subtracted from) the specified allowance value.
Coordinate system: The direction in which the newly generated contour is moved.
Click the icon to select a frame or specify a new frame.
hyperMILL
187

Project on workplane: Projects the contour generated with the C ontour offset function onto the current
workplane.
Apply: Creates a new contour with the data you previously entered.
Cancel: Exits the input dialogue box.
Contour autolink
Link adjacent contours that do not meet exactly. The system trims minor overlaps and closes small gaps
within the tolerance specified. The resulting contours can be used for machining.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Option
Tolerance: Enter the required tolerance value.
Approx. Tol.: Fineness of curve resolution: Default value for converting 2D contours with elliptic arcs or
splines into a set of connected lines.
Colour/Layer: See the information in section Contour offset (page 187) .
Remove original curves: Deletes the original curve.
Contour feedback: Activates the graphical feedback display.
Selection
Curve: Select curve(s) to be machined.
Surface: Select machining surface(s) whose boundary contours you want to use in subsequent machining.
Calculate: All selected elements are combined into a contour using the value set under Tolerance.
Undo: Undo a selection or calculation that has been carried out.
Start point/End point: Only elements that lie between the start and end points are combined to form a
contour.
Allowance: Using a stock allowance value, a new contour can be created for a contour that has been
calculated with hyperMILL or created in a CAD program.
Increment: The value defined here is added to (or subtracted from) the specified stock allowance value.
Apply: Creates a new contour with the data you previously entered.
hyperMILL
188
Wrapping side shell
Wrap or unwrap a label for a sideshell. For more information, see the hyperCAD-S product documenta-
tion.
Wrapping tread
Wrap or unwrap a profile pattern. For more information, see the hyperCAD-S product documentation.
Convert grid to Nurbs
Only hyperCAD. Convert grids generated in hyperMILL (for example, toolpaths) into Nurbs curves
(Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines curves) for subsequent machining.
Boundary Recognition
Only hyperCAD. Recognise external contours of any number of surfaces.
Tolerance: Surfaces, whose distance from each other is less than the tolerance value, are combined.
Layer: Specifies the layer on which the newly calculated contour is stored.
Entity type:: Surface/Solid face: Selects surfaces whose external contour you want to calculate.
Search double elements
Only hyperCAD. Recognise any number of double elements.
Tolerance: Selects elements whose gap distance is less than the tolerance value.
Doubles are moved in layer: Elements recognised as being doubles are stored on this layer.
Entity type: Curve/Surface: Select the type of elements to be recognised.
Search small surfaces
Only hyperCAD. Recognise any number of small surfaces.
Minimal area: Surfaces, which are smaller than the value specified here, are recognised.
Layer: Selected surfaces are stored on this layer.
Extract circles and arcs
Only hyperCAD. This utility can be used to extract circles and arcs from contours (for example,
boundaries and holes of surfaces and solids). The extracted circles and arcs can be used for drilling cycles
and for circular pockets. The following sections are available in the dialogue:
Selection
Curves/Surfaces: Use these buttons to select curves and surfaces (including solid faces) in which circles
and arcs should be recognised.
Recognise
Circles/Arcs: Here you specify whether circles and/or arcs should be recognised.
Tolerance: Define tolerance.
Coordinate system: Define coordinate system. The circles are stored on planes parallel to the XY plane
belonging to the specified coordinate system.
Filter
Use filter: The diameters for circles and arcs to be recognised can be limited here.
Use extended filter: It is possible to combine two filters.
Result
Specify how the recognition results are to be stored.
hyperMILL
189

Insert height →A bsolute: Specify an absolute value for the insert height interactively in the CAD model. If
this value is zero, all the generated circles and arcs will reside on the XY plane of the selected coordinate
system.
Top of contour/Bottom of contour: References of the top of contour/bottom of contour. The circles and arcs
are stored in planes parallel to the XY plane. The Z values of these planes are offset by the value entered
for the top or bottom of the original contours.
Colour/Layer: Define the colour and layer for the circles and/or arcs.
3DF to STL
Only hyperCAD: Convert*.3dffiles into*.stlformat. Set the respective file paths and select the
colour and format.
Note that the solids generated with this additional function are not closed and can
therefore not be used for a stock model update (stock model calculation).
Compare models
Only hyperCAD. Compare two models that were created in a CAD program.
Compare models
Current model: The model in the active window.
Reference model: Select the reference model here.
Options
Tolerance: Default setting based on the defined surface tolerance.
Show result
Colour for changed surfaces: All changes are shown in the defined colour.
Move changed surfaces to layer: Any surfaces containing changes are saved to the specified layer.
Copy changed solid faces in layer: Copies are generated for the changed solid faces and saved to the
specified layer.
Read toolpath
Read toolpaths from jobs that have already been calculated.
Delete graphical hyperMILL data
Only hyperMILL for Autodesk ® Inventor®. Delete all graphical hyperMILL data (temporary tool graphics and
so on).
hyperMILL
190
CAD Utilities
Prepare CAD models for machining with hyperMILL.
hyperMILL for hyperCAD-S
The following CAD utilities are available:
Converter – display surface errors
Display incorrectly converted surfaces.
Start via the hyperMILL Tools menu.
Surface errors are displayed on the V isibility+TAGs →C onverter →S urface errors tab. If no surface errors
are found, show the model again by enabling the C omplementary TAG.
The C omplementary and S urface errors tags are also created when errors occur while
updating geometry cache.
hyperMILL for hyperCAD
The following CAD utilities are available:
Place erroneous surfaces on layer
hyperMILL runs a plausibility check on the selected surfaces before each milling area recognition. If one
or more surfaces with errors are recognised, you can use this function to save the found surfaces with
errors to a layer.
If you start the function, the S urface error window is opened, which shows all surfaces with errors. Enter
the layer number or layer name on which the recognised surfaces are saved in the lower right input field.
Click the M ove & Exit button to save the surfaces on the defined layer and to end the function. To analyse
the surfaces with errors, show only this layer. You can repair the surfaces (for example, reconstruct) or
remove them from the milling area if they are not relevant to CAM editing.
Close surfaces
You can use this function to close the (sub)surfaces of a CAD model whose boundaries lie within one
surface. If you call up the function, the newly generated surfaces have the colour that is set to active in the
CAD programme and are stored on the first available empty layer.
Split Solids
Use the S plit Solid function to split solids along curves. The resulting solids remain as single solids.
First select the S olid to be cut. Then select the c urve(s) that you want to use as cutting edges. Finally,
all you need to do is select the solid surface (base surface) whose normal will define the cutting direction
(direction: N ormal). If you do not want to use the surface normal of the base surface as the cutting
direction, you can also define the cutting direction via T wo points. You can also define c olours and l ayers
for the resulting solids (optional).
Change entity properties
You can use this function to change the p roperties (layer and colour) of any elements (surfaces and
curves). First, select the e lements (surfaces/curves) that you want to change. Then select the properties to
be changed ( L ayer, Colour or both) and close the dialogue box.
hyperMILL
191

Thicken planes
This function allows you to increase the thickness of any planes in a CAD model. Under I nput, first
select the type of object selection. You can either thicken all planes of a certain c olour or l ayer or select
the planes manually (option: S elect). Afterwards, define the h eight and output l ayer of the plane to be
changed.
Export parameter
With this function, you can change parametrised CAD models by exporting a parameter list. Choose a
path and file name in order to save the content of a parameter list. Consequently, the n ame and v alue of
each parameter are saved.
Import parameter
Use this function to import changes to a parametrised model as a parameter list. Choose the P ath and
File name for the current parameter list and click O pen.
hyperMILL for Autodesk® Inventor®
The following CAD utilities are available:
Show surfaces with errors
hyperMILL runs a plausibility check on the selected surfaces before each milling area recognition. If one
or more surfaces with errors are recognised, you can use this function to save the found surfaces with
errors to a layer. You can repair the surfaces (for example, reconstruct) or remove them from the milling
area if they are not relevant to CAM editing.
Hide surfaces with errors
You can use this function to hide all surfaces that could not be converted correctly when generating the
polyhedron.
Clear information about surfaces with errors
You can use this function to delete information about surfaces that could not be converted correctly
when generating the polyhedron.
hyperMILL for SOLIDWORKS
The following CAD utilities are available:
Incorrect converted faces
hyperMILL runs a plausibility check on the selected surfaces before each milling area recognition. If one
or more surfaces with errors are recognised, you can use this function to save the found surfaces with
errors to a layer.
You can repair the surfaces (for example, reconstruct) or remove them from the milling area if they are not
relevant to CAM editing.
Zoom all: Zooms all incorrectly converted faces in the current CAD window.
Zoom selected: Zooms the incorrectly converted faces that have been selected in a list in the current
CAD window.
All off: Hides all incorrectly converted faces in the current CAD window.
Show all: Shows all incorrectly converted faces in the current CAD window.
Show selected: Shows the incorrectly converted faces that have been selected in a list in the current
CAD window.
Delete all: Deletes all incorrectly converted faces in the current CAD window and deletes them from the
list of incorrect faces.
hyperMILL
192
Move all to excluded face list: If the i ncorrectly converted faces are faces that you do not require for
machining, you can exclude them from the selection. You must then convert the surfaces again, so that the
polyhedron is generated correctly.
Update
Changes in the model geometry are forwarded to hyperMILL.
hyperMILL
193

Produce electrodes
hyperCAD-S hyperCAD-S Electrode offers functions for designing, managing, programming and docu-
menting complete tool electrodes with electrode holders and with product manufacturer information for
the die-sinking EDM with the spark erosion behaviour. Fully program electrodes for milling based on
hyperMILL with the electrode feature and macro programming.
Preparing milling NC programming
Various prepared tasks are to be performed. Prepare the electrode holder library. Determine default
settings. Read in the electrode colour pallet and assign the electrode colours.
Design and map the electrodes and output the electrode reports. Detailed information on this work can be
found in the hyperCAD-S software documentation.
In the hyperCAD-S dialogue F ile →O ptions →E lectrode options →R eference →E lectrode name →I ncre-
ment for names, define the name of the electrode geometry and of the milling project for producing an
electrode.
Example:
Electrode name Increment for names Derived electrode geometries/
milling projects
Electrode 10 Elektrode_10.hmc,
Elektrode_20.hmc
Transfer production-related data to hyperMILL
Production-related information such as undersize, stock size, material, areas of electrode geometry and
the position reference are mapped during the electrode design. The information in hyperMILL is evaluated
and provided for programming.
NC Programming
NC Programming is performed semi automatically. Job list, milling area, stock, fixture and electrode
feature are automatically created in the N ew →E lectrode milling dialogue on the shortcut menu of the
job browser. The linking of electrode feature and job, the creation of macros and the linking of electrode
features and macro are intuitively guided by the user.
Milling project directory
Define the milling project directory in the hyperCAD-S dialogue F ile →O ptions →E lectrode options →
Directories. The data for NC programming is saved in the milling project directory. This includes:
hyperMILL
194
• The mapped electrode(s) (1, 2):
•Elektrode_10.hmc, in subdirectoryElektrode_10,
•Elektrode_20.hmcin subdirectoryElektrode_20.
The data is generated with the hyperCAD-S function E lectrodes →M ap and mill.
• For each electrode geometry:
• The milling areaElektrode10_Fräsbereich, in subdirectory3DF,
• the stockElektrode10_Rohteilin subdirectorySTOCKand
• the clampElektrode10_Spannmittelin subdirectoryCLAMP.
The data is generated by activating the hyperMILL functions M illing area, S tock and C lamp in the
Electrode milling dialogue.
Milling project
Electrode_10
Electrode_20
Model
Milling area
Stock
Clamping
Machine
Electrode10_Milling area
Electrode10_Stock
Electrode10_Clamping
General Macros Settings
Job list
Name
1 2
To produce electrodes, two options are offered on the E lectrodes menu in hyperCAD-S:
1. Use the M ap and mill function to select the electrode geometry and generate a folder in the milling
project directory in which the electrode is saved as a CAD file.
A new instance of hyperCAD-S is started in which the selected electrode is displayed.
The Electrode milling dialogue is started at the same time for NC programming.
2. With the M illing function, start the E lectrode milling dialogue for NC programming.
You can also start the dialogue via the N ew →E lectrode milling shortcut menu from the hyperMILL
job browser.
The Electrode milling dialogue
The data for NC programming (joblist, milling area, stock, clamp and electrode feature) are created in the
Electrode milling dialogue. Subsequent machining of data is not possible via this dialogue.
The dialogue comprises the dialogue pages G eneral, Macros and Setup.
General
Joblist
hyperMILL
195

The Name of the joblist is copied from the electrode designation.
Global clearance plane: set by default to 10000.
Model
Milling area and stock are created in the hyperMILL browser, if the M illing area and S tock functions are
activated. The geometric data is copied from the selected electrode.
A clamp is created as an element in the hyperMILL browser if the C lamp function is activated. The
geometric data is copied from the holder of the selected electrode.
Activate the M achine function and select the desired machine. In doing so, the M achine function is
activated in the job list and the selected machine is transferred.
NCS
Use the NSC (NC system) to define the position of the zero point. Possible zero point positions include:
(1) Top of electrode area
(2) Top of reference contour
(3) Bottom of reference contour
(4) Bottom of electrode (only if n o clamping device is activated)
(4) Top of electrode holder (only if a clamping device is activated)
(5) Reference zero clamping system
Based on the selected zero point position, zero point and frame are created as elements in the hyperMILL
browser.
1 2 43 5
Macros
Available macros and selected macros are displayed on the dialogue page. To use a macro during
programming, move this to the Selected macros area. Generate the required macro beforehand. This is
carried out based on the generated electrode feature using the N ew macro from feature function.
Use the A llow multiple apply function to enable multiple use of feature-based macros.
For information on creating a feature-based macro, see section Create macro (page 261) .
hyperMILL
196
Setup
The milling project directory for producing the electrode is displayed on the dialogue page. With comments
provided, production-related information is offered for the jobs. The C alculate function is used to create the
toolpaths.
Save file
The milling project directory is displayed.
Joblist
Comment 1-10: Create optional comments. Comments are copied into the joblist created as joblist com-
ments.
Enter the comments using a text editor. Each line in the text editor corresponds to a job list comment.
Options
Calculate: The toolpaths are calculated.
Joblist and electrode feature
A J ob list and E lectrode feature are created if the E lectrode milling dialogue is closed with O K. In
the job list, the functions Stock, Model and Clamp are activated and the previously created elements are
selected.
In the electrode feature, the production-related elements of the electrode geometry, such erosion area,
extension, etc. and the stock geometry are saved as feature parameters.
Milling strategy and macro programming
In the next step, the electrode feature can be linked with a milling strategy via the N ew job with feature
function (context menu of the electrode feature). On the F eature dialogue page (the Feature Job Connec-
tor) of the job definition activate the geometry mapped by the electrode feature.
In order to optimise the production of various electrodes, link milling strategy and electrode feature via the
New macro from feature function.
If the macro is saved in the macro database, it is displayed in the E lectrode milling →M acros dialogue.
Calculate toolpaths
The toolpaths to produce the electrode are calculated if:
• The M illing area and Calculate options are activated in the E lectrode milling dialogue.
• A macro is selected in the U sed macros area of the Electrode milling dialogue.
• The Electrode milling dialogue is closed with O K.
Electrode user variables
Production-related data is displayed as user variables in the U tilities →E lectrode user variables dialogue
(shortcut menu of the job browser) and can be used for programming in the job definition. The dialogue is
divided into the areas: Spark gaps, CAD parameters and Milling parameters.
Spark gaps
Check the size of the spark gaps for machining tasks R oughing, Re-roughing, Semi finishing and F inishing
and adjust if necessary. The size of the spark gap corresponds to the undersize in NC production (nega-
tive value).
User variables in the CAD parameters and Milling parameters areas are only displayed and cannot be
changed.
CAD parameters
Minimum distance stock (1): smallest distance between the top point of the electrode surface and the
stock.
hyperMILL
197

C angle (1): Rotation of stock around the C-axis for the best possible fit of the electrodes.
Milling parameters
All milling parameters are based on the zero point (A) of the machining (here: top of electrode holder).
(1) Top of machining area
(2) Bottom of machining area
(3) Top of erosion area
(4) Bottom of erosion area
(5) Bottom of measuring frame
(6) Total machining height
(7) Electrode height
(8) Min. distance linear sweep (for several ribs)
(9) Max. distance linear sweep (for several ribs)
hyperMILL
198
hyperMILL
199

The machining sequence at a glance
Create and select electrodes for milling
Create joblist, Milling area, Stock, Define NCS
Create electrode feature
Electrode feature
Faces for erosion area, Linear extension, Tangent extension
Reduction, Block, Stock
Create Reference system
ELECTRODES
Create user defined
Print
Import colours
ELECTRODES
Derive and milling...
Milling
Create
ELECTRODE MILLING
General: Milling area, Stock,
Define NCS
ELECTRODES USER VARIABLES
Check spark gaps
Show CAD parameters
Show milling parameters
ELECTRODE FEATURE
New job with feature
Activate feature parameter
ELECTRODE FEATURE
New Macro from Feature
Macro database
Select macros
Calculate toolpaths
Apply macros
F: Electrode roughing
Save Electrode feature and job as macro
Combine Electrode feature and job
3D Optimised Roughing...
3D Complete Finishing ...
Specify default settings, Read in electrode colour palette,
Assign electrode colours, Prepare model
3D Optimised Roughing...
ELECTRODE MILLING
Start calculation
hyperMILL: preparatory work
hyperCAD-S Electrode
hyperCAD-S Electrode
F: Electrode finishing
hyperMILL
200
5. Feature and macro technology
The advantages of feature technology
Feature technology processes geometry information present in the CAD model for CAM programming in
a way that significantly reduces programming effort. In addition to the assigned geometry, features also
contain information relevant to manufacturing, such as tolerance values or fits.
The automatic derivation of manufacturing geometries makes it possible to transfer data directly from a
feature to the job definition (Feature Job Connector) for use across jobs and job lists.
Furthermore, Customised Process Features make it possible to define company standards for similar
geometries, thus increasing programming automation even further. In this process, work processes are
defined and stored as technology macros, which can be applied to similar machining tasks.
Feature technology provides you with enormous potential to increase efficiency and save time in manufac-
turing.
User interface
The user interface of the feature module comprises the following:
• The feature browser (Feature tab in the hyperMILL browser) with representation of the feature lists
and features.
• The Feature editor (Feature dialogue) for defining feature parameters and
• The Feature job connector (Feature dialogue page of the job definition) for selecting and using
features in a job.
The feature browser
The Feature tab in the hyperMILL browser is known as the feature browser. The feature browser compri-
ses the following:
• The top area with feature lists and shortcut menu functions (1)
• The bottom area with feature and shortcut menu functions (2)
• A freely definable filter (3)
• A toolbar with filter functions and functions to control the visibility of features (4).
hyperMILL
201

The display of features
Use the following options to control the display of features:
1. V- By showing or hiding the features of a feature list.
Activate (show features) or deactivate (hide features) the
function in the top area of the feature browser.
2. By entering any numeric or alphanumeric characters into the filter
Enter any digits or characters that are contained in the
feature name to control the display of comprehensive fea-
ture lists and thus improve the transparency of the feature
browser.
3. Using feature filters.
Open the feature filter by clicking the icon on the toolbar. A
list of available feature filters is displayed in the F ilter name
column.
Select the type of geometric elements for the filter defini-
tion and then select the desired element / desired element
directly in the CAD model. Alternatively, enter a value in
the corresponding line. A filter is only active if the Feature
feedback function is activated.
Move to feature list →N ew: Create a new feature list with
the features that correspond to the filter conditions.
Move to feature list →[ L1], ... [L2]: Select a feature list to
include the features that correspond to the filter conditions.
(1) Filter enabled, (2) Filter selected, (3) Filter disabled.
4. Via the drop-down list on the right of the toolbar
Only show the marked feature.
Show all features.
hyperMILL
202
Hide all features.
5. Via the shortcut menu of the feature browser in the top area
Expand All Mode Show all features
Hide all Hide all features.
Show selection / Show se-
lection only
Show the features of the marked feature list.
6. Via the shortcut menu of the feature browser in the bottom area
Zoom In Zoom in on a selected feature in the graphics window.
Automatic zoom-in on Always automatically zoom in on a selected feature in the
graphics window. The zoom function remains in place until it
is deactivated (see A utomatic zoom-in off).
Display the model in transparent mode
Assign the transparent colour to the model with highlighted representation of the feature.
The CAD system's first available transparent colour is used.
Set the feedback colour.
C - Colour coding of the feature feedback in a feature list.
Change the colour for the feature feedback of the feature list by double-clicking the icon.
Feedback for all the features of this feature list is coloured accordingly in the model.
B - Create a visual bookmark.
Store a defined view of the model. A visual bookmark can be assigned to a feature list or
a feature and makes it easier to work with a large number of features. To define a new
visual bookmark, set the required model view, select the feature or feature list and choose
the N ew visual bookmark function from the shortcut menu by double-clicking the V isual
bookmark icon.
Assign frame to a feature list
Assign a frame to the feature list by double-clicking the icon.
Change the frame of the feature list by double-clicking the icon.
hyperMILL
203

If a feature from this feature list is used for the job definition, the frame of the feature list is analysed.
Frames associated with individual features are not analysed.
Edit a frame with the E dit function in the shortcut menu.
Delete a frame with the D elete function in the shortcut menu.
Sort features
Use the drop-down list on the left of the toolbar to sort the features in the browser according to T ype,
Name or N umber. If you select the N one option, the features will be sorted according to the generating
order.
Functions in the feature browser
Create a new feature list using the F eature list function on the shortcut menu.
Delete a feature list with the D elete function in the shortcut menu.
Change a feature list name by double-clicking and directly editing.
N - Number of features of feature lists / Number of visible features.
The Feature editor
The dialogue for defining feature parameters is called the Feature editor. The Feature editor comprises the
following:
• An input area with feature parameters (1).
• A 3D preview with zoom and rotate functions (2).
• A toolbar for saving inputs and calling the online help (3).
Define feature parameters
Feature parameters are associatively linked to the feature and can be defined by selecting geometric
elements in the CAD model. If a geometric element is changed in the CAD model, the change is copied to
the feature.
Defining feature parameters using the following geometric elements:
Snap point, point, centre point of a circle, top / bottom of a cylinder.
Normal of a plane, normal of a curve, line, cylinder axis. frame.
hyperMILL
204
Closed contour
Contour
Line, diameter of a circle, diameter of a cylinder, length of a cylinder, radius of fillet, distance
of two lines / planes
Angel of cone.
Surface, plane
Define attributes
Click the icon to change geometric elements with attributes.
Point: Orientation (X, Y, Z), offset (in the direction of the defined orientation),
Vector: Rotate, Length:Scale (entered value is multiplied by the length value)
Boundary: Offset.
Contour: top, bottom, start point, end point, plunge point, Offset, reverse, overlapping.
Length: Scale factor
Surface, plane: exchange UV parameters, Use solid normal, Reverse normal of face, ignore
inner boundary.
The offset for 2D Contour, 3D Contour and boundary is considered to be perpendicular to the defined
orientation.
The Feature job connector
The Feature dialogue page of the job definition is known as the Feature job connector. It is used to link
features with the current job and comprises
• the icons to select features (1),
• the top area with the list of linked features (2),
• the bottom area with representation of the feature parameters (3).
hyperMILL
205

ID 1: T100258 Simple drilling
1
3
2
Connected features
Features linked to the job are listed in the Feature Job Connector. The number of features is displayed.
Click on the icon to open the Select feature dialogue in order to link a feature with
the current job.
Features which should be used in the jobs can be moved to the right window by
double-clicking or clicking on the button (1).
Features which should not be used in the jobs can be moved to the left window by
double-clicking or clicking on the button (2).
Feature derived: Production-related feature parameters are represented in the bottom area of the Feature
Job Connector. A feature parameter, whose status is set to a ctive, is used in the job definition for
calculation purposes. If the status is i nactive, the parameter is not used.
Formula: Various geometric parameters of the features: Simple Hole, Sink Hole, Free defined hole, pocket
(for use in contour milling cycle) and planes can be defined using a formula. All basic calculating opera-
tions are permitted as arithmetical expressions for the purposes of defining the formula. In this case, the
feature parameter can be used as a variable.
View feature: The feature linked in the job is highlighted in the graphics window.
hyperMILL
206
For information on using the Feature job connector for job definitions, see section Use feature (page 255) .
hyperMILL
207

Feature catalogue
The hyperMILL feature catalogue includes the following features:
Contour
The Contour feature contains the following feature types: 2D Contour (1), 3D Contour (2), Slot Contour (3)
and Point (4).
Geometric information for the 2D Contour, 3D Contour, T-Slot and Point contour types can be used within
the scope of the job definition for 2D, 3D and 5X Machining as well as during Turning and Probing.
Parameters of the 2D Contour, 3D Contour, T-Slot and Point feature types:
Orientation: Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from CAD system.
Type: Select the feature type.
Contours: Specify contours in the CAD system.
For information on selecting contours, see section Selecting elements in the CAD system (page 26) .
For information on defining attributes for geometric elements, see section The Feature editor (page 204) .
Strategy Curve
Geometric data from the Strategy Curve feature can be used for 2D, 3D and 5X cycles in the job definition.
1 2 3
4 5
The following parameters can be defined:
Orientation: Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from CAD system.
hyperMILL
208
Strategy type: Boundary (1), Single profile (2), Pair profiles (3), Tilt curve (4), Synchronization lines (5).
Specify contours in the CAD system.
For information on selecting contours, see section Selecting elements in the CAD system. (page 26)
Surface Group
Geometric data from the Surface Group feature can be used for 2D, 3D and 5X and drilling cycles in the
job definition.
The following parameters can be defined:
Surfaces: Specify surfaces in the CAD system.
Strategy type: Define the machining surfaces and additional surfaces if required. You can define as many
reference points as needed.
To change attributes for separate surfaces, you can combine several Surface features into one Compound
Feature.
For information on selecting contours, see section Selecting elements in the CAD system. (page 26)
Plane
Geometric data from the Plane feature can be used for 2D, 3D and 5X cycles in the job definition.
The following parameters can be defined:
Plane: Define plane(s) in the CAD system.
Manual Boundary: Activate to define the boundary manually and use B oundary to define a closed contour
in the CAD system. Otherwise, the boundary of the selected surface is used,
hyperMILL
209

Top / B ottom: Enter values or derive from the CAD system. When the feature is used in the job definition,
determine the vertical machining range.
Frame associative: Allows you to move the model to a different position when using the feature in the job
definition. The frame used in the job associated to the model is also moved if the Application - Model check
function in the Job shortcut menu is used.
For information on selecting contours, see section Selecting elements in the CAD system (page 26) .
For information on defining attributes for geometric elements, see section The Feature editor (page 204) .
hyperMILL
210
T-Slot
Geometric information on the T-slot feature can be used in the following cycles: T-slot milling on 3D model
and Pocket Milling.
Parameters of the T-slot feature:
Slot height (1), slot width (2), throat height (3), throat width (4), height upper tolerance (5), height lower
tolerance (6), lateral upper tolerance (7), lateral lower tolerance (8),
Access type one sided (9), access type two sided (10), upper corner type (11), lower corner type (12),
corner type sharp (13), corner type round (14), corner type mill (15), corner radius (16), chamfer angle
(17), chamfer length (18),
Throat contour surface (19), throat contour depth (20), slot profile (21), wall profile (22), face position (23),
face position depth (24), Position top of face position (25),
hyperMILL
211

hyperMILL
212
Generic Pocket
Generic Pockets can be used universally and are structured according to manufacturing elements and
related properties.
Generic Pockets offer significant advantages when using macro machining. In particu-
lar, when setting up a macro database with macro rules, OPEN MIND recommends
exclusive use of generic holes.
Geometric data can be used for 2D, 3D and 5X and drilling cycles in the job definition. Geometric
parameters are automatically copied for use in the job definition.
Height (1), Height tolerance: Upper allowance (2), Height tolerance: Lower allowance (3), Pocket shapes:
General (4), Rectangle (5), Circle (6), Groove (7), Rectangular pocket: Centre (8), Length (9), Width (10),
11
7
1
4
5
6
8
9
10
23
Circular pocket: centre (11), radius (12), slot: slot profile (13), slot width (14), diameter limit (15). Corre-
sponds to the maximum permissible diameter of the tool for machining the pocket. This is also displayed
as graphical feedback during Pocket Recognition.
 
11
12 13
14
15
Number of islands (16), Pocket bottom parameters: bottom type: flat (17), Bottom type through (18),
Bottom type flat: bottom surface (19), Boundary (20)
hyperMILL
213

16 17
18
19
20
16
Bottom edge: sharp (21), Fillet (22), Chamfer (23), Fillet: corner radius (24), Chamfer: chamfer angle (25),
Chamfer length (26), Bottom type through: orientation (27), Contour (28), Bottom offset (29)
2
 232221
 262524
 2827 29
Sidewall – side tolerance: lower (30), upper (31), Sidewall: open edge (32), Sidewall: minimum radius (33)
smallest radius occurring on the pocket wall.
For the lateral tolerance, U pper allowance and L ower allowance are calculated inwards
on each pocket wall. So if the value is positive, the pocket is reduced.
30
32
33
31
Use plunge point: Enable this option if the plunge point automatically calculated by hyperMILL is to be
used for drilling (1), for example. Plunge point (2) and hole diameter (3) are displayed.
hyperMILL
214
1
2
3
Boring diameter (1): Maximum permissible diameter of the tool for drilling.
Diameter limit (2): Maximum permissible diameter of the tool for machining the pocket.
1 2
O-Ring
Geometric data can be used for drilling in the job definition. Geometric parameters are automatically
copied for use in the job definition.
General
(1) O-Ring with pocket, (2) O-Ring with non-centric hole, (3) O-Ring with centric hole, (4) O-Ring without
additional geometry.
hyperMILL
215

Feature parameters
(5) Centre, (6) Diameter, (7) Inner diameter, (8) Depth, (9) Height inside, (10) Inclined angle outside, (11)
Inclined angle inside, (12) Hole position, (13) Hole diameter, (14) Hole height.
1 3
2
4
5
6
7
10 11
8 9
12
13
14
X
Z
X
Z
X
Z Y
hyperMILL
216
Generic Hole
Generic holes are universally applicable, from Simple Holes through to complex stepped holes. Generic
holes are structured according to manufacturing elements and related properties.
Generic Holes were developed to replace in the medium term the Simple Hole, Sink Hole and Free defined
Hole features.
Generic Holes offer significant advantages when using macro machining. In particular,
when setting up a macro database with macro rules, OPEN MIND recommends exclu-
sive use of Generic Holes.
Macro databases created using previous hole features do not support the new Generic Holes. The previ-
ous hole features are still supported as an option under F eature Mapping.
Geometric data from the Generic Pocket feature can be used for the 2D, 3D and drilling cycles in the job
definition.
A generic hole can contain grooves (A), sinks (B) and back sinks (3). A distinction is made between the
following basic sink types: Counterbore (1), countersink (2), drill (3), form sink (4), tapered sink (5), torus
(6) and undercut (7).
7
1 2 3 4 5 6
A
B
C
4
The following parameters can be defined for a groove:
Offset (1), Diameter (2), Depth (3), Tolerance - U pper allowance (4), Tolerance - L ower allowance (5):
hyperMILL
217

1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
The following edge type can be used for holes and as a transition between sinks or between holes and
sinks: Fillet (1), Sharp (2), Chamfer (3). The holes and sinks can feature threads (4), ISO fits (5) or spots
(6).
1 2 3 4 5 6
The following parameters can be defined for threads:
Designation: Select the designation from the list. Assign a name under U ser-defined. This designation is applied to the
feature name:Feature name<thread designation>. D iameter (1), Length (2), Pitch (3).
The following parameters can be defined for ISO fits:
Fit value: Select the fit value from the list. U pper allowance (4), Lower allowance (5) and L ength (6).
The following parameters can be defined for spots:
Top spot depth (7), Bottom spot depth (8).
hyperMILL
218
7
1
23
4 5
6
8
You can also define the I SO fit parameters using an XML file. This is done by evaluating theomI-
SOFitCatalog.xmlfile located in the global working spaceC:\Users\Public\Documents\OPEN
MIND\USERS\featTech\. You can define the following parameters:
• Type, Designation,
• Diameter_Min, Diameter_Max,
• Tolerance_Min, Tolerance_Max,
Example:
<ISOFit_Catalogs>
<ISOFit_Catalog Name="ISOFit|ISO_Fit" Loc_Filename="hmFTMain.loc"
<!-- ISO Fit Defintion A9--> 
<ISOFit_Definition Type="Hole|Hole" Designation="A9">
<ISOFit_Attribute Diameter_Min="1" Diameter_Max="3" Tolerance_Min="270" 
Tolerance_Max="295"><1-3></ISOFit_Attribute>
....
<!-- ISO Fit Defintion J8-->
<ISOFit_Definition Type="Hole|Hole" Designation="J8">
<ISOFit_Attribute Diameter_Min="1" Diameter_Max="3" Tolerance_Min="-8" 
Tolerance_Max="6"><1-3>/ISOFit_Attribute>
....
</ISOFit_Catalogs>  
The bottom type of the generic hole can be defined as: Through (A), Flat (B), Tip (C), Through hidden (D)
and Ball-shaped (E). The following parameters may also be defined for the generic hole:
Bottom offset(1): Extends the hole by the specified measure.
Preferred machining direction: Specifies the preferred direction for machining the Generic Hole.
Tip angle: (2) Defines the shape of the tip of the hole .
Bottom radius: (3) Defines the shape of the end of the hole.
hyperMILL
219

1
2
3
A B C D E
1
Generic turning feature / Turning groove
Generic features for turning operations can be used universally and are structured by means of manufac-
turing elements and their properties.
Geometric data of the G eneric turning feature can be used within the job definition for the R ough Turning,
Contour parallel Turning and Finish Turning cycles.
Geometric data of the T urning groove feature can be used within the job definition for the G roove Plunging
and Groove Finishing cycles.
Example of use:
(A) G eneric turning feature: (1) Outside profile, (2) Plane profile, (3) Inside profile, (4) Outside roughing
profile, (5) Plane roughing profile, (6) Inside roughing profile
(B) Generic Hole
1
A
2
3
4
5
6
B BA
(A) T urning groove: (1) Turning side = Outside, Shape = Rectangle, (2) Turning side = Outside, Shape =
Generic, (3) Turning side = Plane, Shape = Generic, (4) Turning side = Inside, Shape = Arc, (5) Groove
roughing profile, (6) Left undercut profile
hyperMILL
220
(B) Generic Hole
A
3
B
 BA
1
24
56
hyperMILL
221

OPEN MIND Feature
Simple Hole
Geometric data from the Simple Hole feature can be used for 2D, 3D and drilling cycles in the job
definition.
A distinction is made between the following three basic types (bottom type) of Simple Hole: Through (1),
Flat (2) and Tip (3), as well as Through hidden (4).
1 2 3 4
Depending on the basic type you choose, you can define the following parameters for the Simple Hole:
Orientation (1): Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from the CAD system.
Group: No if no group is to be used. Yes if group is to be used.
Position (2): Define point(s) in the CAD system.
Chamfer: Select this option (if chamfer is required).
Chamfer depth (3): Enter the value or derive it from the CAD system.
Diameter (4), Depth (5): Enter values or derive from the CAD system.
Bottom chamfer: Select this option (if bottom chamfering is required) and specify the depth of the bottom
chamfer.
Bottom type: through hole, blind hole, tip hole, see figure: basic types of Simple Holes.
Offset bottom (only bottom type: through hole). Enter value or derive it from the CAD system.
Tip angle (6): Enter the angle for the tip hole bottom or derive it from the CAD system.
ISO fit: Yes if ISO fit required. No if ISO fit not required.
Fit value (norm): Define tolerance value according to norm (DIN ISO 286-2).
Fit length: Enter the value or derive it from the CAD system.
Thread: Yes if thread required. No if thread not required.
Thread designation: Enter the name of the thread. This will be part of the feature name as follows:
Feature Name<Thread Name>.
Thread diameter (7), Thread length (8): Enter values or derive from the CAD system.
hyperMILL
222
7
1
2
3
4 5
6
8
Thread pitch (9): Enter value or derive from the CAD system.
9
You can substitute the Simple Hole feature with the Sink Hole feature.
1. Select the required feature and right-click.
2. Select R eplace by sink hole and enter sink diameter and depth.
You need to manually rename the feature after replacing it.
Sink Hole
Geometric data from the Sink Hole feature can be used for 2D, 3D and drilling cycles in the job definition.
A distinction is made between the following three basic types: Counterbore (1), Countersink (2) and Drill
(3). Core hole (4).
hyperMILL
223

1 2 3
4
4 4
Depending on the basic type you choose, you can define the following parameters for the Sink Hole.
Orientation, Group and Position:
Chamfer: Select this option (if chamfer is required). D epth (1): Enter value or derive from the CAD system.
Core hole diameter (2), Core hole depth (3): Enter the value or derive it from the CAD system.
Bottom type: Through, Flat, Tip (see figure: basic types of simple holes)
Offset bottom: only bottom type through hole. Enter value or derive it from the CAD system.
Tip angle: Only bottom type tip.
ISO fit: Y es, if ISO fit required. N o, if ISO fit not required. F it value: Define tolerance value according to
norm (DIN ISO 286-2). F it length: Enter the value or derive it from the CAD system.
Thread: Designation.
Diameter (4), L ength (5): Enter value or derive from the CAD system. Pitch (9): Enter value or derive from
the CAD system.
1
2
3 4 5
hyperMILL
224
9
Preferred machining direction: Select machining direction: bottom to top. Top to bottom
Sink type: Counterbore, Countersink, Drill (see figure: Basic types of sink holes) with following sink
parameters:
Diameter (6), Depth (7): Enter values or derive from the CAD system.
Tip angle (8): Drill only. Enter value or derive it from the CAD system.
76
8
10
Chamfer: Y es, if chamfer is required. N o, if chamfer not required. Depth (10): Enter value or derive from
the CAD system. Angle (11): Only countersink: Enter values or derive from the CAD system.
11
hyperMILL
225

Attributes can be defined for the associative parameters of the Sink Hole feature.
Free defined Hole
Geometric data from the Free defined Hole feature can be used for 2D, 3D and drilling cycles in the job
definition.
1
2
3
4
5
6
A distinction is made between the basic types Through (1), Flat (2), Tip (3) and Through hidden (4).
1 2 3 4
Depending on the basic type of hole chosen, you can define the following parameters for the Free defined
Hole feature:
Comment: If necessary, enter a comment.
Orientation, Group and Position:
ISO fit: Y es if ISO fit required. N o, if ISO fit not required. Fit value: Define tolerance value according to
norm (DIN ISO 286-2).
ISO fit offset: Enter the value or derive it from the CAD system. Fit length: Enter the value or derive it from
the CAD system.
Thread: Designation, diameter, length, pitch:
hyperMILL
226
Thread offset: Enter value or derive from the CAD system.
Bottom type: Through, flat, tip, through hidden (see figure: Basic types of free defined hole). Offset bottom:
Enter value or derive it from the CAD system.
Number of steps: Up to 32 steps can be defined.
Step: Type: cylinder, cone, fillet, cutout. Diameter (1): Enter value or derive from the CAD system. Depth
(2): Enter value or derive from the CAD system. Angle (3): Cone type only. Enter value or derive it from the
CAD system.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 2
3
Surface
Geometric data from the Surface feature can be used for 2D, 3D, 5X and drilling cycles in the job
definition.
The following parameters can be defined:
Surface: Specify surface in the CAD system.
Strategy type: Define the surface as a machining surface or additional surface.
Pocket
Geometric data from the Pocket feature can be used for 2D, 3D and 5X cycles in the job definition.
hyperMILL
227

1
2
3
The following parameters can be defined:
Orientation (1): Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from the CAD system.
Contour (2): Specify contour in the CAD system.
Wall angle (3): Enter angle of pocket wall or derive it from the CAD system.
The pocket height is defined using the properties of the selected contours.
For individual contour areas, it is possible to define different Z values (Top / Depth).
Compound Feature
Geometric data from the Compound Feature can be used for 2D, 3D, 5X and drilling cycles in the job
definition. The following parameters can be defined
Frame: Y es if uniform frame required. If this option is selected, only sub features with the same frame
system within the Compound Feature are used. N o, if uniform frame is not required.
Frame origin: Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from CAD system.
Frame orientation: Enter coordinate values or determine the orientation vector from CAD system.
Sub features: Select previously defined features. Existing features can be added to a Compound Feature
directly in the feature browser. To do so, select the feature and use the Compound Feature function in the
shortcut menu.
Sub features of a Compound Feature can be selected directly in the feature browser and freely moved or
reordered (drag-and-drop operations). A Compound Feature consists of referenced sub features. Changes
to one or more sub features are automatically passed to the Compound Feature.
Functions on the shortcut menu
Point optimisation: hyperMILL optimises the paths to be travelled between the holes of the Compound
Feature. To do so, select the feature and then select the P oint optimisation function from the shortcut
menu. The machining sequence is indicated by arrows. The first step is indicated by a blue arrow.
When one of the hole features within the Compound Feature already consists of several holes, these need
to be broken up first for the points to be optimised efficiently. To do so, select the feature and then select
the Explode function from the shortcut menu. The optimise the points as described above.
Reverse sequence: Use this function to reverse the machining sequence for the holes in a Compound
Feature.
hyperMILL
228
Sort Holes: Sort the list of intersecting holes of a Compound Feature in the feature browser. Use D iameter
or D epth to define the sort criterion. Use A scending or D escending to determine the sort sequence Holes
that have the same diameter or the same depth are combined into a frame (feature list). If necessary,
adjust the T olerance for the grouping.
Import hole / Export hole: Import or export all parameters defined with a hole in*.hmfformat. This applies
to the Simple Hole, Sink Hole or Free defined Hole features.
Reference frame: A reference frame can be selected when exporting holes. By doing so, all holes will be
exported with their relative frame coordinates. If this option is not activated, the WCS coordinates are used
when exporting the holes. If the model position has changed, the holes will be correctly imported, if the
same Reference frame is selected.
Use feature lists: When importing the holes, you can enable the Use feature list option to preserve the
allocation of the Features to the Feature lists.
Turbomachinery feature
Turbomachinery features, after being assigned just once, allow the geometry elements of turbine blades
and impellers and blisks to be easily and flexibly reused with different machining strategies. Filter defini-
tions simplify automated machining and macro programming.
Blade
Under General, specify the required N ame for the feature.
In the F eature parameters area, select the geometric elements.
(1) Blade surfaces, (2) Bottom plane, (3) Hub curve, (4) Shroud surface
1 2 3 4
(5) Shroud curve, (6) Curve trailing edge, (7) Curve leading edge, (8) Drive surfaces
hyperMILL
229

Multi-blade
Under General, specify the required N ame and, if necessary, the C lass of the feature.
In the F eature parameters area, select the geometric elements.
Filter definition / Update filter: Automatic definition of geometric elements with the help of various filters.
Customised Process Feature (CPF)
Use a customised process feature to perform recurring machining tasks largely automatically. Link relevant
geometric information with a machining mode and technology parameters and manually define the struc-
ture of a CPF.
Special licences are required to use the Customised Process Feature. Please contact
your OPEN MIND partner.
Requirements
To use a CPF for machining models from a family of parts that are designed in a similar way, the following
conditions should be fulfilled:
1. The models have common geometric characteristics.
2. The machining sequence is specified in the job list.
3. Geometric elements of the CPF are linked with job parameters.
Example pocket machining
Using common geometric characteristics: Profiles (1), Bottom plane (2) and Side surfaces (3), other
pockets of a part family, such as hexagonal or octagonal, flat or deep, small or large pockets, can also be
described.
hyperMILL
230
1 2 3
Machining sequence in the job list:
Machining step Job/Cycle
1. Roughing the pocket 3D Arbitrary Stock Roughing
2. Finishing the hub surface 3D Arbitrary Stock Roughing ( P lane level detection →O pti-
mised – planes only)
3. Finishing the side walls 3D Profile Finishing
Assigning the geometry (CPF) to job parameters
Geometry element (CPF) Job parameters
1. Orientation Frame
1. and 2. surface group Milling surfaces (hub and side surfaces)
1. Profile group Boundary (hub surface boundary)
Milling area/stock Milling area/stock
Define structure
1. In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the F eature tab.
2. Right-click and select N ew →C ustomised Process Feature →M achining object. The C ustomised
Process Feature dialogue opens.
3. Name the CPF according to the machining planned.
4. Specify the CPF elements to be used in the S elect area.
5. Select 1 for Orientation number.
6. Click the
 icon to display further options. Leave the default settings F rame for U sage in job and
W (‘write’) for Mode.
hyperMILL
231

7. Select 2 for Surface group number, click the
 icon and use the predefined settings.
Rename parameters
You can rename the parameters (for example: O rientation 1 > Frame pocket). To do this, enter the name
of your choice in the right-hand part of the line.
In addition, you can assign a graphic to each parameter that clearly shows which geometric elements
make up the parameter. This simplifies the manual selection of geometric elements in the CAD model.
Icons in the C ustomised process feature dialogue:
Insert graphic from a file
Paste graphic from the clipboard
Delete graphic.
Define filter
By defining a filter, you specify how elements are recognised in the CAD model. Manual assignment is
then no longer necessary. This increases the degree of automation when using the CPF.
To define a filter
1.
 Click the icon to open the F ilter definition dialogue, select the A ctive checkbox and enable the
required filter option: U se colour filter, Use tag filter or Use layer filter.
2. Then click the
 and
 icons to A dd / select colour filter or A dd / select tag filter and define the
colour or tag class. If required, click the
 icon to select the surfaces that are to be used as the
basis for the filter definition.
3. If a layer filter or a layer container filter is to be used, select the L ayer filter or Layer container filter
checkbox. Then click the
 and
 icons to A dd / select layer filter orAdd/Select layer container
filter and define the layer/layer container.
4. To do this, in the L ayer / L ayer container line, click the icon
 /
 to select a layer or a layer
container that will be used for the filter definition. Click the icon
 to select the surfaces that are
to be used as the basis for the filter definition. By selecting sample elements, you define which
geometric elements will be used when using the CPF later on. In the case of surfaces on [ Layer
2], the CPF searches in the job for surfaces that are on [ Layer 2].
5. To delete one or all filters, click the C olour, Layer or T ag class line and use the D elete / Delete all
function on the shortcut menu.
6.
 Click the icon to include the elements found in the CAD model on the basis of the filter
definition in the selection.
Prepare CAD model
For the automatic reading of the geometry elements to work correctly using filters, the CAD models must
be created according to the filter definition.
1. Select 1 for Profile group number.
2.
 Click the icon and select B oundary for Usage in Job and W for Mode.
3. Enable the M illing area and Stock options and name.
4. Now confirm the CPF definition.
hyperMILL
232
The CPF structure is now completely defined. The newly created CPF appears as an entry in the list under
Customised Process Feature.
Use CPF
The aim of using the CPF is to automate extensive machining processes. Before the CPF can be used, the
data from a CAD model must be assigned. This link between the CAD model and the CPF supplies a job
with the required information when using the CPF.
Link CPF to CAD data
To link CAD data of a model to the CPF, proceed as follows:
1. Right-click the feature browser and open the CPF dialogue.
2. Select N ew →C ustomised Process Feature →[ CPF name]. A corresponding entry is created in
the lower part of the feature browser [ CPF name] and all previously defined geometry elements
are displayed in the CPF dialogue.
3. For O rientation 1, select the required F rame for machining.
4. Select the hub and side surfaces of the pocket for S urfaces 1 and 2.
5. Select the limit of the hub surface for P rofiles 1.
6. Finally, define the M illing area and Stock.
If all parameters of the CPF are clearly named and the corresponding data from the CAD model assigned,
the CPF can be used in the job definition. The job and CPF are linked in the Feature Job Connector.
Use CPF in the job definition
Usage of a defined CPF using the example of pocket machining (roughing).
Requirements:
• All the jobs required for machining are created in the job list in the correct sequence.
• All job parameters, which are not to be taken from the CPF, are correctly defined.
To use a CPF in the job definition, proceed as follows:
1. In the job definition, switch to the F eature dialogue page and select the corresponding CPF.
2. The cycle recognises that the profile (boundary) as well as frame, milling area and stock can be
used from the CPF for roughing and automatically sets these to active. At the same time, the
corresponding parameters are "greyed out" in the job definition and cannot therefore be machined
manually.
3. Deactivate CPF parameters that are not used in the job definition. To do this, double-click the en-
try in the lower area of the F eature job connector. The status changes from A ctive to Deactivated.
4.
 The job definition is free of errors and warnings and the job can be calculated.
Reuse CPF in new CAD model
To reuse the CPF and the machining sequence with modified CAD data, proceed as follows:
1. Use the hyperCAD-S menu F ile →M erge... to insert the new CAD model, which includes all
geometric elements used in the CPF.
2. Select the CPF in the feature browser, right-click and select U pdate filter definition(s). All ele-
ments of the CPF for which filters are defined are updated. This also applies to filters that were
not directly defined in the CPF (such as filters for the milling area).
By updating the filter, the data is read from the model and transferred to the jobs via the CPF.
hyperMILL
233

The data in the CPF has been correctly defined and can be calculated.
Customised Process Features (CPFs) created using newer versions of hyperMILL
(2011 and higher) are saved as UTF-8 encoded files with the*.omcpfextension and
can no longer be used with older hyperMILL versions. Older CPF files (with the*.omt
extension) will not be changed by hyperMILL.
(1) Model for the assignment of elements in the CPF, (2) Model for the use of the CPF in the job definition.
1 2
hyperMILL
234
Generate feature
A feature can be created as follows:
1. Use the F eature mapping (hole) function in the feature browser to automatically assign informa-
tion from the CAD model to a hole.
2. Use the F eature Recognition function in the feature browser to automatically or manually assign
information from the CAD model to a feature.
3. By manually selecting contours and surfaces using the feature browser. For information on the
feature editor.
4. By manually selecting contours, boundaries, milling surfaces, stop surfaces or additional surfaces
in the job definition.
Feature Mapping (Hole)
To transfer hole information from a CAD model (solid):
1. In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the F eature tab.
2. Right-click the upper area of the feature browser and select the F eature Mapping (Hole) function
from the shortcut menu.
The Feature Mapping (Hole) dialogue comprises the areas G eneral, Options and More.
General
Tolerance: Specifies the accuracy level for transferring the geometric data from the CAD model.
Options
Check slot: Enable this option if slot recognition is required.
Slot tolerance: Tolerance for the axial distance between concentric part-holes of the same diameter.
Detect spot depth: Recognised features are checked for spots and any existing spots are displayed
accordingly. The spot depth (1) is displayed in the list of feature parameters.
1
Check bottomRecognised features are also checked for bottom spots and any existing spots are displayed
accordingly.
Gap tolerance: Recognised features are checked for gaps and marked accordingly (see figure). The spot
depth (3) is displayed in the list of feature parameters.
(1) Gap tolerance < column, (2) Gap tolerance > column
hyperMILL
235

1 2
3
.
Limiting diameter: Enable this option when holes require diameter limiting.
Max. diameter: Features are only created for holes with diameters that are equal to or smaller than the
maximum diameter.
Use preferred machining direction: All holes that can be machined from the defined direction are combined
into a single feature list.
Offset angle (degree): Angle range within which the preferred machining direction is checked. Default =
0.5°.
Example:
(1) Preferred machining direction is not activated:
The machining direction (A) of all holes is unchanged.
(2) Preferred machining direction is activated, Offset angle (degree): default (0.5):
The machining direction (A) o f a hole is reversed.
(3) Preferred machining direction is activated, Offset angle (degree): 45°:
The machining direction (A) of a ll holes is reversed.
45° 45° 45°
1 2 3
A
hyperMILL
236
This characteristic is evaluated with application of the feature in an intelligent macro.
Check sink: A check is carried out to see if sinks can be machined from the defined direction. In the
example, the preferred machining direction is defined using the frame.
Example:
(1) Check sink is activated.
(2) Check sink is not activated.
All the features are combined into a feature list and are shown in turquoise.
Machining direction (3): Define the machining direction.
Click the icon and select a geometric element (line, normal of a surface, frame ...) or enter vectors
manually.
Feedback position (4): Define the origin of the graphical feedback for the preferred machining direction.
Click the icon and select a geometric element (snap point, point ...) or enter coordinate values manually
(with reference to the origin of the graphical feedback).
1
2
3
4
More
Offset to bottom: Features based on through holes are created with the bottom offset specified here.
Use feature list: If this option is enabled, the holes are saved as features in existing feature lists. Feature
assignment is in reference to the frames assigned to feature lists. Feature lists that do not contain frames
are ignored.
Frame creation mode
2D: A feature list is created for each drilling direction and a frame is assigned to each feature list.
hyperMILL
237

5X: All recognised features are combined into one feature list, but a frame is not assigned to this list.
Mixed: If several holes have the same orientation, a feature list is created for this orientation and a frame is
assigned to the feature list. All other holes are combined into one feature list, but a frame is not assigned
to this list.
Split by diameter: In the case of multi-step holes, the diameter of the individual steps is taken into account
when arranging the features in the feature list (B). The machining direction (4) is included.
If, from the direction of machining, the diameter of a subsequent step is greater than the diameter of the
preceding step, the hole is divided into two or more S imple (3) and S ink Holes (2).
If the s plit by diameter function is disabled (A), this multi-step hole is included in the feature list as a f reely
defined hole (1).
1 2
3
4
A B
Check machinability: If this function is enabled (B), only holes that are in accessible areas are recognised
as a feature and displayed. In figure (A), the function is disabled; (1) shows the machining direction.
1
A B
Use colour table
When importing feature information from a CAD model, hyperMILL also recognises feature properties such
as thread, ISO fits or feature classes if these are defined in a colour table.
hyperMILL evaluates the assignment of colour information to feature properties when generating features
and incorporates the corresponding parameter directly in the feature. At the same time, this parameter is
also included in the feature name and is thus available for selection when creating and using macros.
To read information from a colour table, enable the U se colour table option in the F eature Mapping
dialogue, select a file in *.xml format ( S elect colour table) and confirm your entries. In order for hyperMILL
to be able to correctly recognise the Thread and Fits feature properties, they must be defined as follows:
Example:
hyperMILL
238
<Color_Table>
   
<Color_Machining_Definition R="128" G="64" B="64" 
FitDesignation="H7" ThreadDesignation="Mx"
FeatureClass="Special FC" 
UseThreadNominalDiameter="1"/>
<Color_Machining_Definition R="128" G="0" B="128"  
FitDesignation="H12"ThreadDesignation="M;G"
UseThreadNominalDiameter="0" /> 
</Color_Table>
The R (Red), G (Green) and B (Blue) identifiers can be assigned colour values between 0 and 255.
The F itDesignation element can assume fit designations (example H 7) and the T hreadDesignation ele-
ment can assume the values M = Metric Coarse Pitch, M x = Metric Fine Pitch, W = Whitworth and G = Gas
Uni.
Several thread types are separated by ; with the order of the list determining the order of the search.
The FeatureClass element can accept designations of defined feature classes.
UseThreadNominalDiameter can assume the values 0 and 1 . 0 = Reference value is the core diameter of
the thread, 1 = Reference value is the nominal diameter of the thread.
Use colour table only: Only the holes whose colour matches the colours in the colour table are adopted.
Holes with colours, which are not defined in the colour table, are not recognised.
Use Generic Hole only: During the assignment of feature information from the CAD model, S imple Holes,
Sink Holes and Free defined Holes are transferred directly to the feature browser as Generic Holes.
Keep CAD features: Enable if a hole feature created with hyperCAD-S should remain associatively linked
with the hyperMILL feature after feature mapping.
Min. tip angle: Define from which angle holes can be recognised as a tip or through hole type. If the
defined tip angle is larger than the angle in the hole, these holes are recognised as the through hole type.
If the tip angle is smaller, the holes are recognised as the tip hole type.
Example:
(1) Min. tip angle = 75°. Holes 50°/ 60° = Through, hole 90° = Tip.
(2) Min. tip angle = 55°. Holes 50° = Through, holes 60°/90 = Tip.
(3) Min. tip angle = 45°. Holes 50°/ 60° / 90° = Tip
50° 60° 90° 50° 60° 90° 50° 60° 90°
1 2 3
Create associative point: Display and edit point coordinates of hole features relative to a selected frame.
Grouping features: Features with the same geometry are combined into a feature for each frame. (1)
Function is not enabled, (2) Function is enabled.
hyperMILL
239

 
 2
1
6
3 4
57
8
9
1
X
ZY
X
Z
Y
2
1 2
Result of Feature Mapping:
1. All holes that comply with the mapping conditions defined and are drilled in the same direction are
compiled into a feature in the feature list.
2. A new frame is created for a feature list if there are at least two holes with the same drilling
direction. All of the other features are combined in another feature list without a frame.
3. A hyperMILL feature appears as a new entry in the feature list and can be used in the job
definition.
Min. segment angle: Cylindrical surfaces with a segment angle greater than 270° are recognised as holes.
Feature Recognition
Interactive recognition of feature information from a CAD model. The following modules are available in
hyperMILL:
• Single Hole Recognition
• Plane Recognition
• Pocket Recognition
• Boundary Recognition
To recognise feature information from a CAD model:
1. In the hyperMILL browser, switch to the F eature tab.
2. Right-click the upper area of the browser and select the required function from the shortcut menu.
Single Hole Recognition
Geometric information is gathered from the holes in a model by defining a sample hole and searching for
comparison holes, whose parameters are compared with the base hole.
The S ingle Hole Recognition dialogue comprises the following dialogue pages: S ample hole, S earch and
Setup.
hyperMILL
240
Sample hole dialogue page
The parameters of a sample hole form the basis for recognising a hole.
Strategy
Automatic recognition: Only select a surface of the base hole. All other surfaces are automatically recog-
nised.
Manual Definition: Select all surfaces of the base hole.
Reference feature: The parameters of a reference feature are used as the basis for creating Generic Holes
based on points/circles on surfaces. On the S earch dialogue page, use the P oints and surfaces option
and select the surfaces/points that are to be used to create the hole features. The orientation of the newly
created hole features follows the surface normals in the area of the selected points.
Move to featurelist: Select an existing feature list to which the features will be assigned. With the N ew
option, a new feature list can be created.
Selection
Select surfaces of the hole.
Sample search: Start recognition of the sample hole.
Reverse direction: Reverse the direction of the sample hole.
Use the R eference feature strategy to select a feature from the list as reference features.
Parameters
List of recognised parameters of the base hole.
Further parameters can be defined if necessary.
Name: Define a name for the hole. The name is automatically copied to the feature list.
Thread: Yes, if you want to use a Thread.
Thread: S tandard: Select a thread form from the Standard Options offered for the thread form Metric
Coarse Pitch, Metric Fine Pitch or Whitworth. To define an individual thread form,
1. Select U ser, define the d esignation and
2. specify the values for D iameter, Pitch, Type and Length.
Search dialogue page
Here you can determine which hole surfaces should be compared with the base hole. As the result of this
comparison, holes are found which have the same parameters as the base hole.
Group selection
User: Select the required holes, whose parameters are to be compared with those of the base hole.
You can also search for holes using the Window selection function in the CAD program.
This is particularly useful with very complex models, for which Feature Recognition is
only partly relevant.
Complete model: All holes in the model with the same parameters as the base hole are automatically
recognised.
Start: Start the automatic recognition of the holes. All recognised holes are shown under Result in a list
display. The numbers mean:
Example: 3 (2)
hyperMILL
241

(3) Number of directions
(2) Number of holes in this direction
Recognised holes are transferred to a feature list as a Generic Hole or Compound Feature.
Holes with the same parameters (Direction, Depth) are combined into a feature. Please note that the
defined base hole is also always included as a component of a feature.
Filter
Use a filter to limit the hoes to be recognised.
Same colour: Only holes of the same colour as the base hole are recognised.
Same layer: Only holes on the same layer as the base hole are recognised.
Same orientation: Only holes with the same orientation as the base hole are recognised.
Frame limit: Define a frame limit (angle) for the recognition process.
Frame: Define the frame to be used for the frame limit.
B axis / C axis: Use the two tool rotary axes to limit the angle for the hole recognition process. The B axis
corresponds to the X/Y direction and the C axis corresponds to the Z direction of the defined frame.
Z
X Y
+ 90°
+ 90°
The defined angle limit in each direction is shown in colour on a rotary ball. Yellow = machinable area
(directions from which holes are recognised). Grey = unmachinable area (directions from which holes are
not recognised). Example: angle B axis: 0° to 90°, angle C axis: 0° to 90°.
Same depth: Only holes of the same depth as the base hole are recognised.
Depth limit:Only holes are recognised which correspond to the depth limit (from/to).
Remove hole: Mark hole and in the short-cut menu select the R emove function.
Reverse hole direction: Mark hole and in the shortcut menu select the R everse function.
If the R eference feature is selected as the S trategy, the following functions are available:
Group selection
Points and surfaces: Select surfaces / points which should be used to create the hole features. The
orientation of the newly created hole features follows the surface normals in the area of the selected
points.
Use the M ove to featurelist function to select an existing feature list to which the features will be assigned.
Alternatively, create a new feature list (option: New).
Circles: Select circles which should be used to create the hole features. The orientation of the newly
created hole features follows the surface normals in the area of the selected circles.
hyperMILL
242
Reverse direction: Reverse the direction of the newly created drill feature..
Setup dialogue page
Tolerance: The required tolerance of the curve resolution for the holes.
1
A B
Slot tolerance: Tolerance for the axial distance (1) between concentric part-holes of the same diameter.
The following rule applies: if the distance is smaller than the tolerance, one hole is recognised (A); if the
distance is larger than the tolerance, two holes are recognised (B).
Use solid info: If the option is activated, an attempt is made to copy the direction of the drill features from
the CAD model (solid). If the option is not activated, the direction of the drill features is calculated (based
on surface information).
Use Generic Hole only: As a result of the recognition, only generic holes are created.
Pocket Recognition
The model used should be a (static) solid. Closed solids offer the strongest guarantee that all bottom
surfaces (surface normals) will be recognised correctly. In open solids, surface gaps may mean that some
topological information is missing and consequently yield incorrect results. In individual cases it may be
necessary to check the surface normals manually.
Pockets with bottoms, through pockets, open and closed pockets and T-Slots are recognised. Recognition
is performed through the use of manual or automatic surface selections.
The Pocket feature recognition dialogue comprises the dialogue pages S ample pocket, Search and Setup.
Sample pocket dialogue page
Define the pocket type to be recognised. Select the surfaces of a sample pocket. Define search options
and filter criteria. Recognised bottom surfaces and pockets are presented in a list.
Option
Pocket type: Define a pocket type for recognition purposes. Distinguish between the following:
Pocket with bottom: Pockets with a bottom are recognised.
T-Slot: T-Slots are recognised.
Pockets with bottom and T-slots: Pockets with bottom and T-slot are recognised.
Through pocket: Through pockets are recognised.
Tolerance: The required tolerance of the curve resolution for the selected feature.
Name: Define a name for the pockets. This is used in the hyperMILL feature browser; it also contains the
smallest radius in the pocket. This name is used when performing a tool search in the macro database.
Example:
If a pocket has this name, it can be machined using tools with a radius of 3 mm or less.
hyperMILL
243

If you want pockets with bottoms to be recognised, you can use the following options to more accurately
specify the sample pockets:
Combine pockets: Enable if individual pockets of a model are to be automatically combined into a more
complex pocket.
When used in a job, combined pockets are processed more efficiently than individual pockets
It is possible to combine the following: pockets with bottoms (1), through pockets (2) and open (2) and
closed (3) pockets. The pockets must have a common edge (4) and the same frame in order to be
combined.
Pockets connected to one another through an open pocket (5) are not considered for
automatic combination.
1
2
3
4
5
4
If the pockets have chamfers or fillets, the values for the corner radius (fillet) or chamfer angle and chamfer
height parameters must be identical. It is not possible to join chamfers and fillets for combination.
The individually recognized pockets, the combined pockets and the Generic Pocket are displayed in the
feature browser as a result of the Pocket Recognition.
Generate O-Rings: If this function is activated, the following variants of an O-Ring are recognised: (1)
O-Ring with pocket, (2) O-Ring with non-centric hole, (3) O-Ring with centric hole, (4) O-Ring without
additional geometry.
hyperMILL
244
The following F eature parameters are also recognised: (5) Center, (6) Diameter, (7) Diameter inside, (8)
Depth, (9) Hight inside, (10) Inclined angle outside, (11) Inclined angle inside, (12) Hole position, (13) Hole
diameter, ( 14) Hole height
1 3
2
4
5
6
7
10 11
8 9
12
13
14
X
Z
X
Z
X
Z Y
Suppress chamfers/ p lanes: Enable if you want to exclude planes and chamfers from recognition. In this
case, the following will be excluded from recognition
• Planes (pocket bottoms) that do not have any pocket walls and
• Planes that have been recognised as chamfers (see Setup dialogue page).
Open pocket reduction: Enable to reduce the number of open pockets that are recognised. If there are
several adjacent planes which can potentially be used as bottom surfaces, the largest plane (by area) (1)
is used as the pocket bottom.
1
2
hyperMILL
245

Manually combine pockets
Generic Pockets can be manually combined either in the feature browser via the shortcut menu or using
the colour table. The pockets must have a common edge and the same frame in order to be manually
combined.
1. Highlight the pockets to be combined in the feature browser and select the C ombine pockets
function on the shortcut menu.
2.
 Use the Setup hyperMILL (dialogue page D atabase) to open the C olour table dialogue.
Define the colours to be used for the combination in the P ockets section. The colour of the hub
surface is relevant for pockets with bottoms and the colour of the wall surface is relevant for
through pockets.
3.
 Alternatively, click the icon to select a sample element (surface), whose colour is to be used.
Enable the U se colour table option on the Pocket Recognition S etup dialogue page and disable
the Use all colours option.
For pockets that are combined using the C ombine pockets shortcut menu in the feature browser, a new
feature list is created that is marked with the [ C ombined] notation.
Bottom
Select all: Searches the entire model for pockets.
Surfaces: Select surfaces to be recognised as pocket bottom surfaces.
Bottom: Recognised bottom surfaces are presented in a list.
Reverse: With closed solids, the correct direction is usually detected automatically. In the case of ambigu-
ous solids or individual surfaces, reverse the direction manually. To do so:
1. Double-click or select the list item.
2. Right-click and select R everse if the direction of the selected bottom surface is to be reversed or
select
3. R everse all if the direction of all of the bottom surfaces is to be reversed.
When the direction of a surface is reversed, pockets that have already been recognized will be removed
from the list and Pocket Recognition must be repeated from the beginning.
Pocket
Recognised pockets are presented in a list. In addition, the parameters Open/Closed, Height, Edge type
(Chamfer/Fillet), Radius/Height, Chamfer angle of the respective pocket will be displayed.
For each pocket recognised, the functions Close corners and gaps and Close slots are also available in
the shortcut menu.
Close corners and gaps (A): Boundary contours of pockets (1) whose holes interrupt the contour (2) are
closed.
Close slots (B): Boundary contours of slot-like pockets that are the same length and run parallel to each
other (1) are closed in a semicircle (2).
hyperMILL
246
Z
Y
X
Z
Y
X1
2
2
2
2
1
1
A B
During Pocket Recognition, a check is also automatically carried out to see whether a recognised pocket
meets the conditions for a slot. If this is the case and the pocket contour has a start and end point, then the
slot profile may be used as a contour during contour milling (example 1) and the slot ends may be used as
drill points during drilling (example 2).
Example 1: Model (1), Pocket feature (2) and Slot profile as contour (3).
1 2 3
Example 2: Model (1), Pocket feature (2) and Slot end as drill points (3). The Pocket features thus created
contain the designation Slot in the feature name.
hyperMILL
247

1 2 3
Example 3: Generic Pocket<Closed R10 Slot>with Slot profile (1) and Slot width (2).
1
2
1 2
The S lot, S lot profile and S lot width feature parameters are displayed in the feature editor. Proceed as
follows to machine the recognised slot:
1. Create a new job (2D Contour Milling) using the corresponding Pocket feature.
2. Define the tool diameter according to the slot width and specify the O n contour option as the t ool
position.
3. Select the A ctive only option from the shortcut menu of the slot profile on the F eature dialogue
page.
4. Define all other parameters.
Pocket type: Through pocket
Pocket
Complete model: If you select this option, hyperMILL searches the entire model for possible through
pockets, while taking account of the Frame selected. Click Start to start the search for pockets.
User defined: Manually select the pocket walls for Pocket Recognition.
Pocket walls: Select the pocket wall surfaces.
hyperMILL
248
Autochain walls: hyperMILL automatically connects the missing wall surfaces for a through pocket, provi-
ded that a frame orientation can be determined from the selected surfaces.
This is usually the case if, from the frame view, you select two non-parallel, planar wall surfaces (A) or one
non-planar wall surface (B).
A B
Cut out: hyperMILL also recognises open through pockets. Note the following for surface selections:
• You must always select two wall surfaces that represent the start and end of the open pocket (A).
• If the edges of these surfaces have a parallel line profile relative to the frame orientation, you must
also select another even surface whose edge has a non-parallel profile relative to the frame (B).
For the user-defined surface selection, you can select any wall surfaces. Here, the above conditions for the
start and end of the pocket and the parallelism of the edge surfaces apply.
Click Start to start the search for pockets.
hyperMILL
249

BA B
Result
The number of recognised pockets is displayed. Recognised pockets are shown in a list display. In
addition, the parameters Open/Closed, Height, Edge type (Chamfer/Fillet), Radius/Height, Chamfer angle
of the respective pocket will be displayed.
Search dialogue page
Search for comparison pockets based on the defined sample pocket(s). Limit the search for comparison
pockets to a part of the model (option: U ser) or search the entire model (option: C omplete model).
Recognised pockets are presented in a list.
Setup dialogue page
Limit the search using filter criteria. Define comparison parameters for the search. Define conditions for
accessibility of pockets and the creation of feature lists.
Pocket filters
Tool diameter: Limit the pocket size using the tool diameter. Only pockets matching the following criteria
will be recognised: the upper diameter should not fit in the pocket, while the lower diameter should still fit.
Circular pocket limit: This option can be used to prevent holes from being recognized as circular pockets
by defining a diameter limitation. Only pockets that fall within the defined limitation are recognised.
Chamfer height / F illet radius: Height of the chamfer or radius of the fillet between the bottom surface and
the pocket wall.
Chamfer angle: Lower / upper limit for the chamfer angle between the bottom surface and the pocket wall.
Allowed wall types: Specify which wall type is to be recognised. The P erpendicular option corresponds to
the Z axis of the frame that is defined on the Pocket example dialogue page.
Combine pockets: If the S uppress original pockets option is enabled, the original pockets will be deleted
after combining.
Pocket comparison parameter
These two parameters relate to the comparison between the sample pocket and the pockets that are to be
recognised (see Comparison dialogue page).
Scale limit: The minimum / maximum scale limit defines the recognition of pockets in the model on the
basis of characteristic geometric parameters.
Comparison tolerance: The degree of accuracy with which the characteristic geometric parameters (see
Scale limit) of one or more sample pocket(s) are compared with the pockets to be recognised.
hyperMILL
250